Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 17
Shraddha Traya Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of Three Fold Faith
Arjuna said: 1. Those who, setting aside the ordinances of the
scriptures, perform sacrifice with faith, what is their condition,
O Krishna? Is it SATTWA, RAJAS or TAMAS?
In the very opening stanza, Arjuna takes up the discussion
where it was left in the previous chapter and gives it a
definite push forward, making Krishna expound
exhaustively the most profitable and dynamic way of
spiritual life, clearly distinguishing it from the
unprofitable and self-dissipating channels of
misconceived spiritual endeavours.
SETTING ASIDE THE ORDINANCES OF THE SHASTRA
--- The injunctions of scriptural texts are not generally
available for all people, and even when they are made
available, very few will have the intellectual capacity to
understand them. In the excitement of life's activities
around, and the confusions and anxieties within, very few
of us can hope to plan the "paths" of our life according to
the Shastra-provided blue-print. But a sincere seeker might
have a great 'faith' in the Higher way-of-life and a deep
devotion to the ideals preached and propounded
1153
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
generally by all the scriptures of the world. Hence this
question.
PERFORM ACTIONS (Yajantah) --- The term (Yajna) used
here need not be understood as indicating the Vedic
sacrifices and ritualistic performances only. The Geeta is
quite a complete scripture, and as such, it has its own
definitions of terms. The term Yajna has been earlier (in
Chapter III) defined to include all selfless co-operative
endeavours of every individual in a society, undertaken to
bring forth to manifestation, the latent wealth and
prosperity that are in that community. Therefore, all acts
done by an individual during his life, in a spirit of selfless
dedication to the general well-being can come under this
term. Without knowing the serene harmony that throbs
behind life, can one, who is striving hard in the world in a
spirit of detachment and selflessness, hope to avoid
agitations? What would be his condition (Nishtha)? And in
a parenthetical clause Arjuna adds what he wants to
know: "whether such actions of men fall under the
category of 'unactivity' (Sattwa), or of 'activity' (Rajas), or
of 'inactivity' (Tamas)."
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Three-fold is the faith of the embodied,
which is inherent in their nature --- the SATTWIC (pure) , the
RAJASIC (passionate) and the TAMASIC (dull, dark) . Thus
thou hear of it.
1154
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
As a preface to his discourse, the Lord says that 'faith'
(Shraddhaa) itself is of three kinds: the divine, the
undivine, and the diabolic. Shraddhaa determines the
texture of our impressions (vasanas) in us, which, in their
turn, command our view-of-life. Our desires, thoughts,
and actions are charted by our view-of-life. Naturally, an
individual's physical activities, psychological behaviours,
and intellectual make-up are all ordered by the type of
Shraddhaa he has come to maintain in himself. And, if the
Shraddhaa is of the wrong type, the entire expression of his
personality, in all walks of life and in every field of
endeavour, can only be ugly. As his inner disposition, so
will be the man. The more an individual identifies himself
with his physical sheath, the more crystallised becomes
his ego, under the influence of his inner disposition. The
temperaments that rule the behaviours of the human are
three in number, the 'Good' (Sattwic), the 'Passionate'
(Rajasic) and the 'Dull' (Tamasic).
WHY SHOULD WE TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION
THESE TEMPERAMENTS AT ALL, AND TRY TO
UNDERSTAND THE TYPES OF FAITH AND THEIR
PLAY IN LIFE? THESE ARE EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
3. The faith of each is in accordance with his nature, O Bharata.
Man consists of his faith; as a man's faith is, so is he.
1155
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ACCORDING TO ONE'S OWN NATURE
(SATTWAANUROOPA) --- The type of faith that feeds
and nourishes each bosom is, we notice, vastly different
from that of another. The more we observe the differences
the more we are led to inquire why it should be so. The
Lord, in the Geeta, explains that the 'faith' in each heart is
ordered by its own nature. It is very difficult to say
whether 'FAITH' prescribes the nature or the nature
prescribes the 'FAITH'; each is intimately wedded to the
other, each obeys the other most faithfully, indeed.
However, the Geeta declares that it is the nature in an
individual that rules his 'FAITH;' although, if FAITH can
be broken and remoulded, as it can be, sometimes, at the
irresistible compulsion of painful experiences, the nature
of that one does faithfully obey the new Shraddhaa. But,
generally speaking, the 'FAITH' in each man takes the hue
and quality from the stuff of his being --- the predominant
temperament in him. The essence of 'FAITH' lies in the
secret energy of the ego with which it holds on to its
convictions, to reach a definite, chosen end, by well-
thought-out and entirely self-planned means.
Man's potentiality determines his 'FAITH' to a given end,
and this 'FAITH' then reacts upon his potentiality,
determining his future course, and moulds the being in
the man. Both act and react upon each other. That the
nature of man is determined by the preponderance of any
one of the gunas over the others, has been already
discussed (XIV-10). As a result of previous conservation of
1156
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a particular tendency, one of the 'qualities' gains a
preponderance over the other two, even from one's
childhood. This is indicated here by the term Sattwa,
according to which (Anuroopa) is the 'FAITH' entertained
by the individual.
SHRADDHAA IS THE INDIVIDUAL --- Man is
constituted of and exists in his Shraddhaa. Each devotee
ultimately reaches the seat of his devotion, if he
consistently, and with sufficient intensity, devotes himself
to its attainment (VII-20 to 23).
AS A MAN'S FAITH SO IS HE (Yo yat Shraddhaah sa eva
sah) --- Man is verily what his FAITH is. The type of
personality and its effectiveness or otherwise are all
determined by the 'FAITH' under which it functions. That
the achievement of life, is ever coloured by the type of
'FAITH' with which the individual pursues his activities,
is very well known and realised by all men of action. In
the very language of the Geeta this idea is already
explained in an earlier chapter (IX-23).
4. The SATTWIC , or "pure" men, worship the gods (DEVAS)
; the RAJASIC or the "passionate, " the YAKSHAS and the
RAKSHASAS; the others --- TAMASIC people, or the "dark or
dull" folk, worship the ghosts (PRETAS) and the hosts of
BHUTAS, or the nature/spirits.
1157
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SATTWIC MEN WORSHIP DEVAS --- Every man in life
brings his entire devotion and offers it at one altar or
another, and seeks fulfilment from the benefits that accrue
from the invocations. In scriptural language this is called
WORSHIP. This need not indicate only the ritualistic
worship of some God or deity. The term WORSHIP here
embraces a wider implication. Every one of us is a
WORSHIPPER at some altar chosen by him; even atheists
are worshippers... perhaps they devote themselves to the
alter of sense-objects, or of wealth, or of power. In this
ampler meaning, if we are to read the stanza, the meaning
becomes very clear indeed. Men of Sattwic temperament,
because of their serene composure and tranquil
disposition, seek their fulfilment at an altar of divinity
indicating the Higher impulses and the nobler qualities of
their being. Naturally, they seek and come to adore such a
divine Godly altar.
YAKSHAS AND RAKSHASAS BY THE RAJASIC --- Men
of 'passionate nature' (Rajas) are those who have extreme
ambition and are constantly restless in their self-chosen
fields of activity. They are said to be worshipping and pro-
pitiating demi-gods (Yakshas and Rakshasas). The idea here
is that the choice of the altar will depend upon the silent
demands of the heart of the devotee. One will never go to
a bookstall to purchase some dress. So too, the active and
the passionate type of men can feel an admiration for, and
can appreciate, only an equally active and passionate
(Rajasic) demi-god or deity.
1158
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE TAMASIC MEN (WORSHIP) THE PRETAS AND
BHUTAS --- The dead 'spirits' and such other low and
vicious powers are invoked by the men of 'inactivity'
(Tamas) for the satisfaction of some of their low urges for
vicious sense-gratifications. Men of low moral calibre and
false education, generally, would try to fulfil their
pernicious ambitions with the help of the wretched
vengeful scum of the society (Pretas, Bhutas), who, though
physically alive, are dead to all sweetness and goodness in
life. These hired goondas (thugs), generally chosen from
professional jail-birds, are the fit powers to be invoked in
order that low and criminal ambitions of the Tamasic can
be fulfilled.
The same import has been brought out in many earlier
stanzas (VII-20 to 23; IX-23 to 25). The modern man would
be rather curious to know whether there really exist such
powers and deities as pretas and bhutas. It is in fact
immaterial for the purpose of studying this portion of the
Geeta whether such powers REALLY exist or not. They
are indicative of certain types of powers which are
available in this world of ours.
"The help gained from good friends," the "protection
invoked from the rich and the powerful," and the
"enormous strength gathered from the low thoughtless
men of criminal intentions" --- these are the different types
of 'altars' at which men of serenity (Sattwic), of ambition
(Rajasic), of heedlessness (Tamasic), generally seek their
individual satisfaction. From the nature of a man's field-
1159
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of-activity, we can, to a large extent, understand to what
type he belongs.
THAT THE SPIRIT OF DEVOTION IN MEN, EVER
REMAINING THE SAME, EACH WILL SELECT
ACCORDING TO THE TYPE OF HIS 'SHRADDHAA,' HIS
OWN ALTAR OF DEVOTION, HAS BEEN SHOWN IN
THE ABOVE. THE WRONG WAY OF STRIVING IS
PAINTED BELOW:
5. Those men who practise terrific austerities, not enjoined by
the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egoism, impelled by the
force of lust and attachment . . .
6. Senselessly torturing all the elements in the body, and Me
also who dwells within the body --- you may know these to be of
'demoniacal' resolves.
Over-enthusiasm can produce only a physical exhaustion,
and an inward fatigue. No spiritual unfoldment can be
expected from unintelligent expenditure of energy in
wrong channels merely because it is undertaken in the
name of religion. The majority of seekers mis-apply their
energies and come to suffer. Therefore, Krishna considers
it easier to paint the picture of the false seekers and
ridicule their unintelligent methods.
Physical restraints and self-denials are, no doubt,
sometimes prescribed for some sturdily-built types, for
1160
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
some limited period. At the same time it is not proper or
correct to believe that any kind of self-denial would
constitute an austerity, and that by following it, creative
unfoldment of the inner personality-structure could be
successfully brought about. The austerities must be
scientific, and therefore, not against the injunctions laid
down in the sacred books that discuss this subject.
Some people generally undertake severe austerities only
as a show. Men 'GIVEN TO OSTENTATION AND
EGOISM' are not fit for austerity. They remain mentally
unfit for Tapas as long as they are lusty and extremely
attached to the world-of-objects around. Such individuals
cannot practice austerities.
Even when such people practise austerities and develop
some inward dynamism as a result of their tapas, their
intentions being gross, they will only misuse the new-
found strength in wrong channels, and in the end, bring
about their own self-destruction --- the famous examples
of Rakshasas in the Puranas are illustrative enough. Such
people, practising austerities, regardless of the correct
injunction of the Shastras, belong to the Asuric type.
ME, DWELLING IN THE BODY --- Such unintelligent
austerities not only oppress the elements constituting the
physical frame but also the Sacred and the Divine Lord
within. Life gets choked as it were in such an individual --
- meaning, Life cannot express its fullest beauty through
such a broken form. Extreme tapas is stupid and is
1161
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
condemned here. Intelligent control is tapas, not cruel self-
torture!
THE THREE KINDS --- THE SATTWIC, THE RAJASIC,
AND THE TAMASIC --- OF FOOD, OF WORSHIP, OF
AUSTERITY, AND OF GIFT ARE DISCUSSED IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZAS:
7. The food also which is dear to each is three-fold, as also
sacrifice, austerity and alms-giving. You may now hear the
distinction of these.
Introducing the theme that is to follow, Lord Krishna
enumerates the topics that He is going to discuss. The
temperamental influences that govern the mind and its
thought-life express themselves in all departments of
activity in which the individual employs himself. His
choice of food, of friends, of the type of emotions in his
bosom, of the
view-of-life that he will be entertaining are all indicative
of the type to which the seeker belongs. As a matter of
fact, everyone living on the surface of the earth expresses
himself in one of these classifications, due to the
preponderance of one or the other of the three
temperaments (gunas).
Yajna, Tapa, Daana --- In the choice of 'food,' in the type of
'sacrifices' which he would feel inspired to make, in the
1162
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
texture of his 'self-denials,' and in the quality and quantity
of his 'charity,' he will declare himself as belonging to one
or the other of the three types.
Here follows a detailed analysis of one's inner nature, and
naturally, one's outward expressions, when one is under
the irresistible influence of any one particular guna. These
verses are NOT to be misconstrued as ready-reckoners TO
CLASSIFY OTHERS. Hinduism, in its essential beauty, is a
subjective science for bringing about a fuller unfoldment
of the dormant potentialities in AN INDIVIDUAL'S OWN
PERSONALITY. In unravelling the beauties of the soul
and in exploiting the strength of the heart, each one will
have to purify himself from the dullness of Tamas, and
from the agitations of Rajas, and keep oneself in the
creative alertness and spiritual glow of Sattwa.
HEREUNDER, WE FIND ENUMERATED A SERIES OF
SYMPTOMS BY WHICH WE CAN CORRECTLY
CLASSIFY OURSELVES:
8. The foods which increase life, purity, strength, health, joy and
cheerfulness (good appetite) , which are savoury and oleaginous,
substantial and agreeable, are dear to the SATTWIC (Pure) .
In describing the natural taste for some particular types of
food in good men of spiritual urges (Sattwa), it is said that
they like only such diet which increases the vitality
(Aayuh), and not sheer bulk; which supplies the energy for
1163
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
meditative purposes (Veerya); which discovers for them a
secret strength (Bala) to resist the temptations for the
sense-objects; which provide health (Aarogya) so that they
may not often fall ill and suffer a break in their regular
sadhana. Such people will have a natural inclination to take
food which will augment joy (Preeti) and inner
cheerfulness (Sukha). In short, such creative men, by their
own choice, enjoy only food that is clean and wholesome
with no chance for them, when consumed, to putrefy
within.
All the different types of food eaten by man in the world
have been classified and brought under four types on the
basis of their physical properties. They are the savoury,
the greasy, the firm and the cordial types of food. Men of
purity instinctively like all these types of foods when they
have the above-mentioned effects upon the consumers ---
when they (the consumers) have digested and assimilated
them.
No doubt, food has certain effects upon the eater.
Generally, an eater is, to some extent, conditioned by the
type of diet he eats. Not only is our inner nature built by
the type of food consumed, but the inner nature, in its
turn, commands our tastes; and we find very often that we
have developed an irresistible appetite for certain types of
food. In the case of animals it is noticed that sometimes
they change their diet, according to their physical need in
life; dogs and cats are often seen eating grass, cows licking
salt-slabs, etc., children eating sand, and pregnant women
1164
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
manifesting different tastes at different periods of their
pregnancy.
EXPLAINING THE RAJASIC TYPE OF MEN AND THEIR
TASTE IN FOOD, THE LORD SAYS:
9. The foods that are bitter, sour, saline, excessively hot,
pungent, dry and burning, are liked by the RAJASIC , and are
productive of pain, grief and disease.
Men of energy, the 'passionate,' desire such food
(Rajasasya ishtaah) that have strong flavour and dense
taste. Bitter, sour, saltish, very hot, pungent, harsh,
burning tastes are to the liking of all vigorous men,
restlessly striving to fulfil their uncontrolled passions and
desires (Rajasic).
Such a diet, no doubt, creates in an individual brilliant
energies, but in their wildness, they are, to a degree, un-
controllable; and therefore, in their final reactions they
lead the eater towards a life productive of 'PAIN, GRIEF
AND DISEASE.'
A student of these discussions in the Geeta is NOT
justified, if he considers that, by a control of diet the
thought-discipline in himself will also be brought about.
From these stanzas, we have to understand that, when the
texture of thought improves, the individual finds himself
1165
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
changing his tastes: even his choice of food which would
give him full satisfaction in totally revolutionised.
WHAT TYPE OF FOOD WOULD MEN OF DARKNESS
(TAMAS) CHOOSE?
10. That which is stale, tasteless, putrid and rotten, refuse and
impure, is the food liked by the 'TAMASIC. '
(Yaata-yaamam) --- A day is divided, in our old calculations
in the Shastras, into eight Yaamas, wherein a period of
three hours constitutes a Yaama. Therefore, food cooked
three hours earlier, 'gone cold' is that which is considered
as spoiled. In these days of canned food, preserved fruits,
stored vegetables and refrigeration facilities, almost a
substantial majority of us have come to love stale food.
TASTELESS (Gata-rasam) --- In South India, we find a
peculiar hunger for taking rice that has been kept soaked
in water the previous night. The next morning, it becomes
both stale and tasteless. I suppose, in the north, some like
old roti.
FOUL-SMELLING (Pooti) --- Men of inertia have a natural
liking for stinking food that has an insufferable smell for
others. The pulav of the modern tables perhaps belongs to
this category; so too, prawns --- we can multiply
examples. 'Men of purity,' however, would instinctively
1166
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
revolt against a diet that has any stink about it, e. g.,
seafood.
STALE (Paryushitam) --- Food that has been cooked over-
night, or that has been kept for days together. Here we can
include all the fermented drinks, which the Tamasic people
love to drink. All drinks are fermented and the 'kick' in
them increases as the time after preparation increases.
Unsanitary and unclean food seems to attract the taste of
all despicable men of insufferable ignorance and low
culture. They love to eat 'refuse' (Ucchishtam) that is left
over, and impure (Amedhyam) filthy food that is not fit for
human consumption. The above-enumerated list is a
comprehensive report on the base and disgusting tastes of
Tamasic men of low culture and dull discrimination.
WHAT TYPE OF SACRIFICES THESE THREE CLASSES
OF MEN WOULD THEMSELVES ENGAGE IN,
CHEERFULLY?
11. That sacrifice which is offered by men without desire for
fruit, and as enjoined by ordinance, with a firm faith that
sacrifice is a duty, is SATTWIC or 'pure. '
After exhausting the classification of the temperaments as
determined by tastes exhibited by different people in the
world, the Geeta continues to indicate how, in the very
type of activities undertaken, there is an unmistakable
1167
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
declaration of the temperamental beauty, or ugliness, of
the individual.
PERFORMED BY MEN DESIRING NO FRUIT ---
Sacrifices undertaken by men of purity are always
executed in a spirit of selflessness. We have already
explained, earlier in the Geeta, that burning anxiety for the
fruits-of-action is an unprofitable channel of dissipation of
the sacred and vital human energy. Fruits belong to future
periods of time, and to waste the present in anxiety over
the future, is indeed an unintelligent policy of existence.
AS REQUIRED BY ORDINANCES --- Actions in the
world fall under four categories, according to ancient
Vedic lore. Of them 'desire-ridden' (Kamya) and positively
self-insulting, and therefore 'forbidden' acts (Nishiddha)
are the two types that are to be studiously avoided. The
other two classes: (a) (Nitya) the 'daily duties' and (b) the
'special duties' on special occasions (Naimittika) are the
types of actions that should not be avoided but must be
most diligently pursued. These two types --- Nitya and
Naimittika together constitute what the Shastra terms as the
'unavoidable' or 'obligatory duties.' These actions and
duties are indicated here as those required by ordinance.
This term is used here in contrast with the Tamasic type of
activity, 'wherein no ordinance is observed' and men are
always devoid of 'faith' (XVII-13).
SACRIFICE IS OUR DUTY --- This is the motive that
propels the 'good' to act in life. He suffers no dissipation
1168
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of his inner energies either through anxieties to drive
himself to a particular goal or through his restlessness in
herding the environments to settle themselves into a pre-
planned and pre-conceived system of harmony. His mind
is ever at rest in its own native satisfaction. He is
consciously happy that he is pursuing a line of action
which is most conducive to the welfare of all. Such actions
are classed under the Sattwic type of sacrifices.
12. The sacrifice which is offered, O best of the Bharatas, seeking
for fruit and for ostentation, you may know that to be a
RAJASIC YAJNA.
WITH A VIEW TO GAINING FRUIT --- In order to gain a
chosen result, some people act in the world, and naturally,
while in the field of activity, they are much too pre-
occupied with their anxieties and worries. They grow
more and more nervous at their own imaginary fears ---
they ever live in an atmosphere of fear as to whether they
will gain a particular chosen goal or not.
FOR OSTENTATION --- There are others in the world
who act, ever so vigorously, not necessarily for gaining
any predetermined goal, but merely for satisfying their
vanity by exhibiting their wealth or knowledge, thus
proving themselves to be the show of society. Ordinarily,
there are many who work in the world and make such
sacrifices. These do not constitute divine acts, nor can they
1169
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ever be expected to yield a reward of cheerfulness or inner
peace.
Such sacrifices undertaken by men who are anxious to
reach a particular goal and who work for satisfying their
vanity in the community, are to be understood as Rajasic.
THE TAMASIC TYPE IS NOW TAKEN UP FOR
DISCUSSION:
13. They declare that sacrifice to be TAMASIC which is
contrary to the ordinances, in which no food is distributed,
which is devoid of MANTRAS and gifts, and which is devoid of
faith.
Disobeying all the prescriptions laid down in the
scriptures and acting against all Vedic injunctions ---
contrary to all the principles laid down by the Science of
right living --- the sacrifices performed become of the
lowest type. Such a sacrifice cannot at all bring about
happiness either to the performer, or in its final analysis,
to his generation.
WITHOUT DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD --- The utter
necessities of life are, in the vocabulary of the modern age,
indicated by the familiar phrase 'food-clothing-shelter.' In
the scriptural language of Hinduism, the term 'food'
indicates all these necessities of life. A man of sacrifice and
right action cannot expect any inner development because
of his actions, unless they are accompanied by a mental
1170
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
development and an expansion in love which makes him
share whatever he has with the have-nots.
Apart from the above-mentioned two, when rituals are
conducted without mantra or without distribution of
reward for the educated (Dakshina), those sacrifices are
classified as Tamasic.
IN ORDER TO CLASSIFY THE THREE TYPES OF
TAPAS, PURSUED BY THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF
PEOPLE, HERE WE HAVE THREE CONSECUTIVE
STANZAS DEFINING AND EXPLAINING WHAT
TAPAS REALLY MEANS:
14. Worship of the gods, the twice-born, the teachers and the
'wise' ; purity, straight-forwardness, celibacy, and non-injury;
these are called the "austerity of the body. "
WORSHIP OF THE DEVAS, THE TWICE-BORN, THE
GURU, AND THE WISE --- To maintain an attitude of
attunement with a Higher-ideal, whereby the meditator
develops in himself the qualities of the meditated, is called
'worship.' All cultural development, moral growth and
ethical unfoldment can be accomplished only through
these processes implied in 'worship.' It is almost like "the
touch method" of magnetisation. One who is trying to
come away from one's inner personality-encumbrances
must necessarily have an attitude of devotion and
reverence towards the ideals represented in the Deva, the
1171
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DEITY, worked out and lived by the TWICE-BORN,
preached by the Guru and recommended by the WISE.
TWICE-BORN (Dwija) --- The term indicates the Brahmins;
and the term Brahmin means one who has realised the Self.
Born as we are from the wombs of our mothers, we are all
born as humans with certain intellectual beauties, no
doubt, but also with many moral defects. Born out of the
womb all right, but we are yet in the womb-of-matter! To
hatch ourselves out of our matter-identifications and to
emerge into the joy-of-Perfection is to grow into the
Divine Estate of Godmen. This is conceived in our
philosophy as the "second birth," and one who has
accomplished it is called the "twice-born," and one who
has accomplished it is called the "twice-born": once born
from the womb, and for a second time grown out of all the
limitations suffered by the Spirit in Its seeming
identifications with matter.
PURITY AND STRAIGHT-FORWARDNESS --- The
impor-tance of these two has been discussed earlier.
External cleanliness, not only physical but also
environmental, is an unavoidable qualification for a true
aspirant. Unless a seeker diligently practises straight-
forwardness in his dealings with others he will be
developing in himself a split-personality, which will drain
away all his composure, tranquillity and mental vitality.
Brahmacharya --- Constant revelling in the contemplation
of the Supreme Brahman is called Brahmacharya This is not
1172
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
possible unless our nature is turned away from bodily
indulgences in sense-objects and our minds are trained to
turn inward to the Spirit. Therefore, all mental disciplines,
by which we come to develop in us this introspection, are
together comprehended by the term 'Brahmacharya.'
Likewise, a medical college student is called a doctor,
because he is applying himself to the direct means for
becoming one, and the means are not far from the end.
NON-INJURY --- This term has already been discussed
many times very exhaustively. Refraining from bringing
about any harm to others in society with the mind is called
'non-injury.' Physically, it is impossible for us to continue
our existence without bringing, even unconsciously, some
sort of injury to others, but our attitude can be changed, so
that the seemingly unavoidable harm itself can bring
about a great blessing to the world. A doctor ripping open
a patient's abdomen with a sharp knife, though doing an
act of injury, can ultimately bring about a cure for the
patient's illness. Diligently avoiding all acts of injuring
others from our emotional and intellectual realms is the
strictest 'non-injury'that can be practised in life.
All that has been so far explained constitutes bodily
asceticism: physical austerity (Shaareeram Tapas).
Austerity (Tapas) is not a life of brutal self-denial only. On
the other hand, it is an intelligent method of living in right
relationship with the world-of-objects, thereby avoiding
all unnecessary dissipations of our vital energies. The
1173
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
energies that are so economised and conserved are
thereafter directed and employed in cultivating creative
fields. This scheme --- of discovering precious new
energies, conserving them intelligently, and directing
them into more profitable fields of spiritual enquiry --- is
called Tapas, self-control. Conservation of energy, and
redirection of the same to fertilise fresh fields of
cultivation within one's own bosom are all meant herein,
and the stanza concludes with a clear endorsement that
this is true Tapas intelligently pursued at the body level.
TAPAS IN SPEECH IS NOW DESCRIBED:
15. Speech which causes no excitement, and is truthful, pleasant
and beneficial, and the practice of the study of the VEDAS, these
constitute the "austerity of speech. "
Speech is a powerful vehicle in man and it reflects the
intellectual calibre, the mental discipline and the physical
self-control of the speaker. Unless he is well-formed at all
these levels, his words will have no force... no magic about
them. Again, speech is the constant activity of all and it is
an outlet through which the greatest amount of one's
energies are wasted. To control and conserve this
unproductive waste of energy would constitute a great
inner wealth indeed for the seeker.
This does not mean that one must keep a self-ruining,
disgustingly irritating, silence (Mouna). The power of
1174
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
speech must be made use of for integrating the personality
of the seeker. There is an art of using this power in the
right way, beneficial to the aspirant as well as to others.
The technique of employing speech in the most profitable
way is being indicated here in this stanza. The idea
suggested in the previous stanza is being more and more
deepened by the clear suggestions contained in this stanza
that Tapas is not a diabolic act of breaking and destroying
oneself but it is a benevolent scheme for re-making and
rediscovering oneself.
SPEECH THAT CAUSES NO SHOCK --- The words
spoken must be such that they bring no disturbance to
others; they "should neither be irritating nor obscene." The
real touch-stone to know whether we are speaking the
right words or not is the reaction of the listeners, which is
expressed so unmistakably on their faces. But generally,
people speak with their eyes shut, or even when they are
open they are as though blind. Many a miserable man has
failed in his efforts in life, and lost all his friends and
relatives merely because of the bitterness of his tongue,
the harshness of his words, the stink of his indiscreet
thoughts!
TRUE, AGREEABLE AND BENEFICIAL (SATYAM-
PRIYAM-HITAM) --- Words uttered to express the truth in
an agreeable style for the blessing of others constitute
"speech," which, when properly handled and made use of,
will bless the speaker himself.
1175
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In telling a lie, a lot of energy is wasted and this waste is
avoidable if one adopts the policy of truthfulness in his
expression. Words that harmoniously bring forth the exact
shade of ideas in the intellect are "truthful" expressions,
and those that deliberately distort the intentions and
meanings of the intellect are called falsehood. In the name
of truthfulness one can become a disagreeable creature in
society. This is not allowed in a seeker. The Geeta accepts
only that speech as truthful WHICH IS ALSO
AGREEABLE. By unsaid words the Lord's Song seems to
say that when a truth is disagreeable to others, the speaker
is required to maintain a discreet silence!
It is not sufficient that the words in the speech should be
honest and agreeable, but they should also be beneficial.
Speech should not be wasted. Unprofitable talking is a
great drain upon man's energies. Talk only when you
want to express agreeable ideas of permanent values,
which will be useful to the listeners. Those who are
respecting these qualities in their day-to-day vocal
activities can be considered as men performing
"AUSTERITY IN SPEECH."
REGULAR STUDY OF THE SCRIPTURES --- Control of
speech certainly does not mean entering into a state of
inert and lifeless silence of the grave. Investing the
energies of speech in self-profiting and self-creative
channels of endeavour is considered by Krishna as "tapas
in speech." Swadhyaya is a technical term used in our
sacred literature to indicate the careful study of and deep
1176
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
reflections upon the theme of the scriptures. The vital
energy so economised in daily life through a policy of
"speaking only that which is beneficial, agreeable and
truthful," is invested in chanting, in reflecting upon, and
in meditating over the mantras of the Upanishads and other
scriptures.
This stanza is complete in its explanation of the technique.
The first line indicates the channels of economy possible in
the daily expenditure of energy. The second line shows
the avenues of investment wherein the seeker can expect
to gain for himself a greater dividend of a fuller joy. Both
the schemes so suggested completely indicate the
"AUSTERITY IN SPEECH."
TAPAS OF THE MIND IS NOW TAKEN UP FOR
DISCUSSION:
16. Serenity of mind, good-heartedness, silence, self-control,
purity of nature --- these together are called the "mental
austerity. "
If the five noble values-of-life enumerated herein are
lived, they, in their aggregate, effectively produce the
"tapas of the mind." SERENITY OF MIND can be gained
only when our relationship with the world at large is put
on a healthier basis of understanding, tolerance, and love.
One who is an uncontrolled sensualist can have little
1177
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
serenity or composure. Mind runs out through the sense
organs into the sensual fields to eke out its satisfactions.
The driving force that sets the mind on its endless errands
is an intellect, ever seething with desires. Quietude of the
mind can be gained only when it is protected from both
the inflow of the stimuli from the tempting sense-objects
of the outer world, and the whipping desires that march
out from the intellect to drive the mind out into the fields-
of-enjoyment. In fact, a seeker who has discovered for
himself a divine ideal --- in the contemplation of which his
mind forgets to run about, or his intellect overlooks to
send out new desires --- alone can hope to win the serenity
of the mind (Manah-prasada).
KINDNESS (Soumyatwam) --- That warm feeling of
affection for all, which readily rises in a heart of true
devotion and love, is kindness. And that kindly seeker
who lives in this divine attitude towards all things and
beings around, will have no chance of entertaining the
feeling that he is outrageously molested by, or even
temporarily upset with his environment.
SILENCE (Mouna) --- We have already noted that "not
speaking" is not "Mouna." In this stanza, while
enumerating the "austerities of the mind," Lord Krishna
speaks of "silence." It is neither a contradiction, nor a
mistake. Silence of speech must arise from the relative
silence of the mind. Thus Mouna means that noiseless
inner calm, which one comes to experience when
1178
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
corroding passions and exhausting desires are no more
building up in one's mind. "Mouna" (silence) can also
mean "the State of Muni," implying "the State of constant
contemplation."
SELF-CONTROL --- The three above-mentioned qualities -
-- serenity of composure, constant kindness towards
others, and unbroken, calm silence within --- are
impossible unless we are able to control our inner nature
deliberately. The animal in us is generally very powerful,
and unless we are ever vigilant, the lower nature in us
may upset our inner balance and equanimity.
HONESTY OF MOTIVE --- Self-control is not possible
unless our motives are pure and serene. Without any
definite goal in life, without planning our onward march
towards the ideal, we are apt to fall a victim to the various
temptations en-route, and exhaust ourselves in the
bylanes of life. To stick constantly on to the grand road to
success is to assure for ourselves a happy pilgrimage to
Truth. The urge in us that motivates all our mental
activities must be inspiring and divine, or else the chances
are that we will be undermining our own perfections and
ruining our own chances of making life a great success.
The above three stanzas thus give us a clear picture of
what is true Tapas, in our bodily contacts with the world
outside, in our speech and in our mental life. The very
same Tapas is pursued by different people, and even when
they do so, with equal faith, each of them is observed to
1179
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
gain different results. This is not accidental. The people
who do Tapas (Tapaswins) are of different temperaments:
the 'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic) and the 'dull'
(Tamasic). According to their governing temperaments
they act differently, with different tempo and with
different emphasis, so that they come to reap diverse
results from the different types of tapas performed by
them.
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS, THE THREE TYPES
OF 'TAPASWINS' AND THE NATURE OF THEIR TAPAS
ARE INDICATED:
17. This three-fold austerity, practised by steadfast men, with
the utmost faith, desiring no fruit, they call 'SATTWIC. '
When men practise austerities of body, speech and mind,
steadily "with no clinging attachment to, or anxiety for,
the fruits thereof," their tapas falls under the type: the
Sattwic. The "good" are those integrated men who refuse
to worry about the future, because they know that, in the
harmony in nature, the "future is the resultant of the total
past modified by the present. Since the perfection and
efficiency of the PRESENT activities determine and
command the FUTURE results, it is certainly un-
intelligent to worry over the FUTURE and spoil the very
quality of the PRESENT activities. Thus the "good,"
desiring no fruit, but all the same practising, with great
1180
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sincerity, the three-fold tapas as explained above, come to
reap a large dividend from their austerities.
18. The austerity which is practised with the object of gaining
good reception, honour and worship, and with hypocrisy, is here
said to be RAJASIC, unstable, and transitory.
Penance that is performed with a view to gaining respect,
honour and reverence is said to be of the Rajasic type,
performed generally by men of "passionate" nature. Self
control and self-application pursued not for the purpose
of one's own inner development, but only for hood-
winking the world and getting cheap respect, reverence or
worship, is indeed, one of the basest deceits that a man of
culture can ever practise. Earlier Shri Bhagawan Himself
(III-6, 7) called such men hypocrites. Seekers belonging to
this group perform austerities mainly for their
propaganda value, and hence, Bhagawan says that their
tapas is "with ostentation" (Dambhena).
One may wonder what harm is there in practising this
type of tapas? After all "tapas," as we observed, "is
economy of thought-forces and the intelligent
reinvestment of the economised energy into more creative
fields of self-development." And yet, the Geetacharya
condemns those who perform tapas with this wrong
motive, and declares that such tapas is "UNSTABLE AND
TRANSITORY." Any intelligent self-effort, ordinarily, has
a time-lapse, before it can produce its results. Self-
1181
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
application must be constant and continuous in order that
it may produce substantial results. When tapas is
performed with such a low motive as of winning
respectability in society, it cannot even gather the
necessary amount of intensity and thus, tapas of the
"passionate" can only end in a lot of unproductive and
painful self-denials.
THE DULL-WITTED PURSUE THE TAMASIC TYPE OR
TAPAS:
19. That austerity which is practised with self-torture, out of
some foolish notion, for the purpose of destroying another, is
declared to be TAMASIC.
Tapas undertaken with a foolish obstinacy by means of
self-torture, and "austerities" indulged in for the sake of
destroying others are of the lowest type. A Tapaswin must
have clear notions as to why he undertakes the Tapas. And
also, he should know what is Tapas and how to do it.
Without a correct knowledge of the technique, no seeker
can independently walk the 'path' of inner integration and
gain spiritual fulfilment.
When the Vedic notion of Tapas is misconstrued, the seeker
will, at best, be only torturing himself. Self-torture cannot
bring about any unveiling of the true beauty of the Soul; it
can only create a ludicrous caricature of the Perfection in
us. Twisted and torn into a disfigured personality,
1182
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perverted in its emotion and unclean in its ideals --- this
alone can be the outcome of any unintelligent austerity.
And when these misconceived and wrongly practised
austerities are undertaken by any one for bringing about
sorrow and discomfort to others, such Tapas is considered
as Tamasic.
CHARITY ALSO CAN FALL UNDER THREE KINDS:
20. That gift which is given, knowing it to be a duty, in a fit
time and place, to a worthy person, from whom we expect
nothing in return, is held to be SATTWIC.
The gift which is given to someone because of one's
conviction that "it is an act that is to be done," is the right
type of charity. The recipient should be one who can do
no service in return (anupakari). The right type of charity
expects the benefactor to make no discrimination against
the recipients of his charity. A gift is always to be offered,
in a fit place and time, to a worthy person. Such charity,
made with RIGHT faith, to the RIGHT person, at the
RIGHT time and place is of the Sattwic type.
There is a school which believes that charity must be given
just as a tree gives its fruits. The fruits on a tree are
available to all who come under its shade --- irrespective
of their race, status or sex. They argue that as the trees do
not make any discrimination between one enjoyer and the
1183
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
other, so too man should, without making any
discrimination between one recipient and another, share
his possessions freely.
Many will find it difficult to believe in, and live up to, this
principle. The Geeta insists, and rightly so, that man must
use his faculty of discrimination and see whether his
charities are reaching the deserving members in the
community.
THE RAJASIC TYPE IS DESCRIBED BELOW:
21. And that gift which is given with a view to receiving in
return, or looking for fruit again, or reluctantly, is held to be
RAJASIC.
That which is given in charity with a hope of receiving in
return some benefit, be it in any form --- perhaps at a
different time and place --- is of the "passionate type." And
also, a charity that is done reluctantly, not conscientiously,
is of the same Rajasic type. In our everyday worldly
activities, many of our gifts fall under this category.
THE DULL TYPE OF CHARITY IS BEING DESCRIBED
NOW:
1184
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
22. The gift that is given at a wrong place and time, to
unworthy persons, without respect, or with insult, is declared to
be TAMASIC.
Gifts that are made at an improper time, and those made
at the wrong place, to an unworthy person, without
respect, or with contempt, are charities of the dull-witted,
and they are called the Tamasic.
Charity must come from within, as an expression of an
irrepressible urge of one's own heart. Intelligent charity
must spring from the abundance felt within the
individual. He who feels impoverished by his giving has
not done a charity by the mere physical act of giving
away.
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS ARE GIVEN WITH
A VIEW TO PERFECTING SACRIFICES, GIFTS,
AUSTERITIES, ETC.:
23. "OM TAT SAT" --- this has been declared to be the triple
designation of BRAHMAN. By that were created formerly, the
BRAHMANAS, VEDAS and YAJNAS (sacrifices) .
Om Tat Sat --- This is being declared as the triple
designation (Nirdesha) of Brahman. A Nirdesha, generally
given in ritualism, is that by performing which any defects
that are in the sacred worship are all removed. Each
action, no doubt, has its fruit, but the fruit depends not
1185
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
only on the action as such, but also on the purity of the
intentions and motives entertained by the performer.
However diligent the performer of the sacred acts may be,
if the motive behind such acts be foul, they are rendered
too ineffective to yield rich dividends. Actions performed
by all of us, may appear similar, but the results thereof
would vary from individual to individual, according to
the essential quality of their intentions.
The brilliance and glory of our intentions can be
heightened by the remembrance of the Lord. Dissociation
of oneself from one's Matter-envelopments is at once one's
awakening and identification with the Lord. To the extent
the sacred activity is selfless, to that extent its rewards are
pure. To liquidate the ego, the individual must gain the
consciousness of his spiritual status.
"Om Tat Sat" is a sentence of three words, each denoting
one aspect or the other of the Reality. Om represents the
Transcendental and the Pure Self, the Absolute and the
Unborn, which is the Infinite Substratum upon which the
projections of the body, mind and intellect are maintained.
The term Tat is used in our scriptures to indicate the
Eternal Goal, the Changeless and the Ever-perfect. In the
famous grand declaration of the Vedas, "Tat-twam-asi," the
term 'Tat' indicates that from which everything has come,
in which everything exists and into which everything
merges back in the end. Sat means 'existence.' The
"Principle of Existence" functioning through all things ---
1186
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perceived, felt, and thought of in our everyday life --- is
called Sat.
Thus, to invoke the thoughts of Om, which express the
TRANSCENDENTAL ABSOLUTE, or to invoke "Tat," the
UNIVERSAL TRUTH, or to cherish the concept of "Sat,"
the REALITY, is to tune up our instruments of action and
thereby chasten all our activities in the world outside.
The Eternal Reality, indicated in the triple designation of
Brahman "Om Tat Sat," is the Source from which all castes,
the Vedas and the sacrifices proceeded, even at the time of
Creation. All super-impositions can only arise from, exist
in and disappear into that which is their own substratum.
All human activities and endeavours can be classified
under the heads: (a) activities (Ahaara) undertaken for the
maintenance of the body, and (b) activities (Niyata) that
nourish the culture by all co-operative activities pursued
with a spirit of dedication (Yajna), all charities (Daana),
and all intelligent methods of self-control (Tapas).
WHEN ARE WE TO USE THE TERM "OM"?
24. Therefore, with the utterance of 'OM' are begun the acts of
sacrifice, gifts and austerity as enjoined in the scriptures,
always by the students of BRAHMAN.
1187
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The term OM is uttered while acts of sacrifice, gift and
austerity are undertaken by the followers of higher life. To
cherish in our minds the divine awareness and the
absolute supremacy of the Infinite, as expressed in OM, is
to add purpose and meaning to all our acts of sacrifice,
charity and austerity. To invoke in our minds the divine
concept of the Absolute is to free our personality from its
limited fields of ego-centric attachments. When a mind is
thus liberated from its limitations, it becomes more
efficient in all austerities, more selfless in all Yajnas, and
more liberal in all charities.
WHEN IS "TAT" USED?
25. Uttering "TAT" without aiming at the fruits, are the acts of
sacrifice and austerity and the various acts of gift performed by
the seekers of liberation.
THOSE WHO ARE SEEKERS OF LIBERATION --- He,
who is thus trying to "liberate" himself from his own
attachments, selfish desires, self-centredness, and the
consequent agitations, should undertake to perform all his
activities in such a way that the causes that generate these
disturbances (vasanas) in him are not thereby nourished,
but are deliberately extinguished. The stanza is providing
a TIP to the seekers on how this subtle result can be
achieved through actions performed with the right mental
attitude.
1188
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WITH THE UTTERANCE OF THE "TAT" ALONE, THE
ACTS OF SACRIFICE, PENANCE AND GIFT ARE
UNDERTAKEN BY THE SEEKERS OF FREEDOM,
WITHOUT EXPECTATION OF ANY REWARD. 'Tat'
indicates, as we have already explained, the "Universal
Truth" and it declares "the oneness of all living creatures."
To remember the larger interests of the family is to forget
our own self-interest; to work for the community is to
obliterate our own family-interests; to work for the
national redemption is to overlook the limited community
benefits; and to work for the world and humanity is to
sink our national interests. Thus, to work in the field of
yajna or tapas or daana with a mind that is tuned up to Tat,
"the universal oneness of the Spiritual Truth," is to work
with no ego, and consequently, redeem ourselves from the
thraldom of the flesh, from all the limitations of Matter.
WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF REPEATING 'SAT'?
WHAT ARE ITS IMPLICATIONS?
26. The word "SAT" is used in the sense of Reality and of
Goodness; and also, O Partha, the word "SAT" is used in the
sense of an auspicious act.
Sat is used to mean both REALITY and GOODNESS. It is
also used for all praise-worthy actions. In our everyday
contact with the world, we live in a realm of RELATIVE
REALITY and a seeker is apt to take the world perceived,
felt and thought of --- through the play of his body, mind
1189
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and intellect equipments --- as ABSOLUTELY REAL.
Therefore the term Sat is often used to remind us that all
these RELATIVE REALITIES have the self-same
substratum Sat, the Absolute Reality.
THE USE OF THE DESIGNATION 'SAT' FOR BRAHMAN
IS GIVEN AS FOLLOWS:
27. Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and gift is also called
'SAT' and also, action in connection with these (for the sake of
the Supreme) is called 'SAT. '
The term Sat is used to indicate a man's faith and devotion
in sacrifice, austerity and gift. Thus Sat registers one's faith
in the principles underlying Yajna, Daana and Tapas and
also in his various acts of sacrifice (Yajna), charity (Daana)
and austerity (Tapas).
In short, even acts of sacrifice and austerity, when they are
not of the Sattwic type can be rendered "good," when they
are pursued with this required inner attunement which is
gained by invoking in the performer's bosom the concept
of --- the Supreme (OM), the Universal (Tat), and the Real
(Sat) --- the Infinite Brahman. If these chantings are
undertaken with faith and sincerity the seeker's mind
expands and gives up all its selfishness and arrogance.
Ego and ego-centric desires bring about attachments,
which, in their turn, destroy the freedom of the individual
to grow into the ampler field of joy of
1190
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Spirit.
To cut off these shackles which are forged in the fields of
activity, we have to re-enter the very "realm-of-action" and
persuade ourselves to perform such 'right' Karmas as will
liquidate the bad reactions (Karma-Phala), of the 'wrong'
actions of the past. This unwinding of the vasanas, the very
creators of our psychological imperfections, can be
effected only in the field-of-activity. This is accomplished
by an intelligent, right adjustment of our mental attitude
all along, when we are at work. The required changes are
brought about by the remembrance of the Infinite Reality
as indicated by the three terms "OM-TAT-SAT." The
fundamental principle is that the actions can leave behind
only such reactions as are ordered by the type of motives
and attitudes of the performer.
ALL THESE ACTS BECOME PERFECT ONLY WHEN
DONE IN FULL FAITH. THEREFORE:
28. Whatever is sacrificed, given or performed, and whatever
austerity is practised without faith, it is called 'A-SAT, ' O
Partha; it is not for here or hereafter (after death) .
In this thundering negative statement, we have an
indication that faith is man, and an individual without
faith, even if he performs a most glorious act, "IT IS NOT
FOR HERE OR HEREAFTER." Action can create only such
effects as are ordered by the ardour of faith and conviction
1191
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the performer, together indicated here as 'steadfastness'
(Sthiti). The intellectual values entertained by the seeker
will supply the glow in his actions, and since the results of
his actions always depend upon the sincerity and ardour
with which the actions are undertaken, the good or the
bad effects of his actions directly depend upon the
"strength of faith" with which the actions are undertaken
or performed.
Herein, we have a conclusive statement that whatever
sacrifice is made, whatever penance is performed, or
whatever charity is given, it is called 'Asat,' if it is
undertaken 'without faith.' Unreality or non-existence, in
Sanskrit, is called Asat. From the unreal, nothing real can
ever emerge. From the unreal activity, no real result can
come. Therefore, devoted actions, spiritual or religious,
when undertaken WITHOUT FAITH, fail to produce any
result. By so saying, the Lord is indicating that Shraddhaa
is unavoidable, and that without it no progress or
evolution can ever take place.
HEREAFTER --- It is not only in the realm-of-the-Spirit
that this law holds good but also in the material world of
our day-to-day activities. This is a unique, and
unquestionable, rule of life. Without "faith," no one can
come to shine in any field of activity. No one can hope to
gather any profit at all out of any activity, if he has no
faith in it. Both in the secular activities of the market-place
and in the sacred performance of religious acts, the factor
that determines the quality and quantity of the result is
1192
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
our FAITH in our own efficiency and goodness, and in
our field of activity.
SUCH ACTS PERFORMED WITHOUT 'FAITH' BECOME
BARREN --- "ASAT" --- SAYS LORD KRISHNA.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the seventeenth
discourse ends entitled: THE THREE-FOLD FAITH
Om Om Om Om OM
1193
