Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
battle-field of life, facing an array of opposing forces, more
powerful, better organised, and well-supplied with
equipments, are ready to fight and destroy them. In fact
every honest man in life is to a large extent --- be he a fool,
be he a saint --- an Arjuna facing his problems with
hesitations... wanting to run away, and yet, not daring to
do so! The training of Karma Yoga prepares us for the
greater fights on life's battle-fields.
Om Om Om Om Om
Chapter 4
Jnana Karma Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action with
Knowledge
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I taught this Imperishable YOGA to
Vivasvan; Vivasvan taught it to Manu; Manu taught it to
Ikshvaku.
256
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
As we said in our introduction to this chapter, the Lord is
making an open statement, that what He had been saying
so far was nothing other than an intelligent reiteration of
what is the content of the immortal Vedas. Inspired by a
Divine remembrance, the Lord declares that He Himself,
at the very beginning of creation, imparted the Knowledge
of the Vedas to the Sun, and later on, the Sun-god
conveyed it to his son, Manu, the ancient law-giver of
India. Manu, in his turn, declared it to Ikshvaku, the
ancestor of the Solar-dynasty that ruled over Ayodhya for
a long period of time.
The word "Veda" is derived from the root Vid, "to know";
Veda, therefore, means 'Knowledge.' The 'Knowledge' of
divinity lurking in man and the technique by which it can
be brought out to full manifestation are the theme of the
Veda text-books, and the Truth of this theme is eternal.
Just as we can say that electricity is eternal, as there was
electricity even before the first scientist discovered it, and
electrical energy will not be exhausted because of our
forgetfulness of its existence, so too the divine nature of
man will never be destroyed because of our non-assertion
of it. The knowledge of the divine content and its
possibilities in man are indeed eternal.
The creation of the universe, it is accepted even by
modern science, must have started with the Sun. As the
source of all energy, the Sun was the first of the created
257
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
objects, and with its very creation, this Great Knowledge
of the Self was given out to the world.
The theme of Vedic literature being the subjective divinity,
language fails to express it completely. No deep
experience can be exhaustively expressed in words.
Therefore a study of the scriptures by one's own self is apt
to create misunderstandings in the mind of the student,
rather than a right appreciation of it. Thus it is a time-
honoured tradition in India that spiritual lessons are
directly heard from a true Master, who has vivid inner
experiences in the realm of the Spirit. It has been handed
down from Master to disciple and we have been given
here the identity of the earliest students of Brahma-Vidya.
2. This knowledge, handed down thus in regular succession, the
royal sages knew. This YOGA, by long lapse of time, has been
lost here, O Parantapa (burner of the foes) .
This Yoga, the Yoga in which the Vedic teachings regarding
activity (Pravritti) and retirement (Nivritti) are
comprehended, thus handed down in regular succession
among the "Royal sages," has its own destinies. At certain
periods of history, this Knowledge seems to be readily
available for the service of mankind, but at certain other
periods of history it falls into disuse and becomes, as it
were defunct. The golden era of spirituality dies down to
inaugurate the dark ages of undivine life. At such periods
of monstrous materialism, the generation is not left in
258
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
neglect to suffer and groan under its own negative values.
For, at that time, some great master appears on the
horizon to inspire, to encourage and to lead the generation
away from the ruts of sorrow onto the highroads of
cultural revival.
Krishna rightly evaluates the period of the Mahabharata
and declares: "THIS YOGA, BY LONG LAPSE OF TIME,
HAS BEEN LOST HERE."
SEEING THAT THE "YOGA" HAD BEEN LOST BY
FALLING INTO THE HANDS OF THE WEAK, WHO
COULD NOT CONTROL THEIR SENSES, AND SEEING
THAT THE GENERATION HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO
ATTAIN THE OBJECT OF LIFE, THE LORD ADDS THE
FOLLOWING:
3. That same ancient "YOGA" has been to-day taught to you by
Me, for you are My devotee and My friend. This is a Supreme
secret.
With a direct statement in the style of an open confession,
Krishna is here removing all possible misgivings of the
orthodox, by insisting that the Truth he has declared in
the last chapter... Karma Yoga... is nothing other than the
same ancient Yoga.
A Master can feel really inspired and instruct efficiently,
only when he establishes a certain type of affectionate
259
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
rapport with the students. Krishna finds that his friend
Arjuna is fully devoted to Him, and that he will certainly
follow the "Path" indicated by Him. The relationship
between teacher and taught should not be a mere
commercial arrangement of "you-pay-and-I-teach." Mind
and intellect blossom forth only in a warmer climate of
love and freedom, friendship and mutual understanding.
These qualities required for a healthy transference of the
subjective knowledge were found in full measure in
Arjuna and therefore, Krishna says 'I taught you' this Yoga
in the earlier chapter.
The secrecy mentioned here only indicates that a man,
however wise he might be, may not come to suspect the
existence of the Atman in himself without being so advised
by a man of Experience. The Self being that which is
beyond the intellect, (III-41) the reasoning capacity in a
man cannot come to suspect the existence of an Eternal,
Changeless, Conscious Principle, subtler than the intellect,
ever illumining the thoughts rising in the very intellect.
Hence, this Science of Truth is called here as the Supreme
secret."
IN ORDER NOT TO LEAVE IN ANYBODY'S MIND AN
IMPRESSION THAT ANY INCONSISTENT
STATEMENT HAS BEEN MADE BY THE LORD,
ARJUNA ASKS, AS THOUGH RAISING AN
OBJECTION:
260
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna said: 4. Later was Your birth, and prior was the birth of
Vivaswan (Sun) ; how am I to understand that You taught this
YOGA in the beginning?
There is a palpable anachronism in the opening stanza of
this chapter. Krishna says that he taught this Eternal Truth
to Lord Sun in the beginning of creation. It was quite
natural for Arjuna to think of Krishna as the son of
Devaki, the Flute-bearer of Gokula. To Arjuna, his
charioteer Krishna had a definite date of birth, and was
only his own contemporary. Therefore, Krishna Himself
could not have advised the Sun, who, by all calculations,
is the one who manifested in nature much earlier than all
the planetary worlds.
TO REMOVE FROM THE MINDS OF THE HASTY
READERS THE POSSIBLE MISUNDERSTANDING
THAT KRISHNA, THE SON OF DEVAKI, IS THE
SPEAKER OF THE GEETA, VYASA MAKES THE
BLESSED LORD DECLARE THE FOLLOWING:
The Blessed Lord said: 5. Many births of Mine have passed as
well as yours, O Arjuna; I know them all but you know them
not, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .
The scriptural masters of the Hindus exhibit an infinite
amount of patience and understanding, which almost
amounts to an intellectual daring, and they readily come
out to satisfy all possible doubts of all the students. Here
261
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
we find Krishna trying to explain how He was the very
Infinite in His Real Nature and that He had Himself, in the
very beginning of creation, given out Brahma-Vidya to
Lord Sun.
In this section we find an exhaustive discussion of the
"theory of incarnation" (Avatara), as propounded in the
Pauranic literature. To many foreigners, this portion of the
Hindu philosophy and belief has been very confusing, and
many of them have expressed such opinions about it; and,
perhaps, none has put it so vehemently as Max Mueller.
But, when we try to understand it with a sufficient
background of the Vedantic concept of creation, it is not
very difficult for us to follow the idea. We have elsewhere
explained in the "Fall of Man" how, when the Infinite
Reality functions through 'unactivity' (Sattwa), we have
the concept of the God-Principle. Later on in this section,
Krishna Himself explains how He, in all freedom, takes
upon Himself the matter-envelopments and plays the
game of the Immortal among the mortals --- but all the
time Himself being ever conscious of His own complete
Divine Nature.
Not a single mortal embodiment can be the result of sheer
accident. Every man comes to the field of the world only
as a result of his evolutionary progress, even according to
the Darwinian theory. Each embodied life indicates a long
autobiography of that ego, and it is only after a long chain
of existence in different forms that it has at last reached its
262
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
present destination. In each life, as soon as the ego
expresses itself in its given field of activity, it, fortunately,
forgets the entire past, and carries with it only a distinct
flavour (vasana) thereof. But a Master-mind like Lord
Krishna, in His Divine Omniscience, understands that
both He and Arjuna had been through many vicissitudes
of existence, and that "I KNOW THEM ALL WHILE YOU
KNOW THEM NOT."
"HOW THEN CAN YOU, THE ETERNAL LORD, HAVE
A BIRTH IN THE ABSENCE OF DHARMA AND
ADHARMA?" LISTEN:
6. Though I am unborn and am of imperishable nature, and
though I am the Lord of all beings, yet, ruling over My own
Nature, I take birth by My own MAYA.
Here is the most daring and original thought of Vyasa, we
may say, throughout the entire Geeta. The Supreme, on
account of His unquestioned freedom, by His own
perfectly free will, takes upon Himself the conditioning of
matter, and manifests Himself in a particular embodiment
in the world, for serving the deluded generation of that
time. To the Lord, His 'ignorance'is but a pose assumed,
not a fact lived. A mortal becomes victimised by his
Avidya, while the Lord is Master of His Maya. A driver is
bound by his duty to the vehicle, while the owner of the
vehicle is Lord of it. He uses the vehicle for his purposes,
and whenever he reaches his immediate destination, he
263
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
leaves the vehicle with all freedom, and enjoys his own
independent activities. But, the poor driver, bound to the
vehicle, will have to guard it against intruders and serve
the vehicle as its servant. The Lord uses the matter-
envelopments and their limitations as a convenience and
as a set of necessary tools in His game of protecting the
creation.
Thus, though the Lord is Unborn and Changeless in His
Nature, and ever a Lord of matter, yet, keeping His Maya
perfectly under His own control, He comes into the world,
through His own free will. All the time He is fully
conscious of His own Divine status and unchallenged
prerogative. He does not come into being as others do,
compelled by His past Karma, to live here in the world
under the thraldom of Nature. He is not bound by His
mental temperaments but He is ever free from the
mischiefs of His own Maya.
You ask your servant to take your heavy motor-cycle to
the nearby garage for refilling it. If you watch him doing it
you will have some idea of what the Lord is trying to
express here. To that poor man, the unwieldy machine is a
calamity, a suffering. To push it across the road is a risky
adventure for him, because the machine, by its own
weight, guides him, he being powerless to assert his
mastery over it. On the other hand, if you yourself were to
ride, or push, the motor-cycle, you can joyously, and
easily, do so. The vehicle remaining the same, in your
hands it becomes a slave to carry you, while the poor
264
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
servant was being dragged by the clumsy weight of the
heavy machine!
To an ordinary man who is ignorant of the working of his
vehicle, it becomes a painful agony and a difficult
responsibility to make use of these instruments. To the
Lord, the world is no problem, and His personal
equipments and their appetites are always perfectly under
His own control. He comes to lord over every situation.
This perfect freedom of a God-man could not have been
more beautifully brought out in so few words as in these
incomparable lines.
"WHEN AND FOR WHAT PURPOSE IS THE INFINITE
SO BOUND?".. THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
7. Whenever there is a decay of righteousness, O Bharata, and a
rise of unrighteousness, then I manifest Myself.
"Whenever there is a decline of Dharma, I create for Myself
a body." The term Dharma has already been exhaustively
explained. Dharma, "The Law of Being" is a sacred truth,
and when the majority of the members of a community do
not obey this great Truth, there is a conquest of the world
by a herd of biped-animals, and not a co-operative
happily-living family of men, pursuing life in their full
dignity as intelligent social beings. In all such dark
periods of history, some great Master comes to present
265
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
himself as the leader of men to revive 'the-standard-of-life'
and its moral values. This is generally done, not only by
giving a fillip to the existing nobler values, but also by a
corresponding policy of total elimination of the wicked.
It is for this purpose that the Infinite, from time to time,
wears the "matter-apparel" and appears on the scene of
activity, like the owner of an estate, who now and then
puts on his gumboots to inspect and reorganise his estate.
Even while he is on the work-spot, in the burning sun,
among his workers, he is conscious of his lordship over,
and ownership of, the entire estate. Similarly, the
Supreme, which is the substratum for the pluralistic
world, puts on the body-gown and, as it were, walks into
the dusky atmosphere of the immoral life of mankind, for
the purpose of re-organising and conducting a thorough
spring-cleaning of the bosom of man.
In the descent of God explained here, it is very clearly said
that the Lord takes upon Himself, a body, projected for
the purpose by Himself, and that He reserves for Himself
the Divine freedom to be IN it, and yet not OF it: "THEN I
BODY MYSELF FORTH."
FOR WHAT PURPOSE ?
8. For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the
wicked and for the establishment of rightenousness, I am born in
every age.
266
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is quite evident that the Infinite cannot project Itself
forth unless there is some "desire." The State of Desireless-
ness is but the State of Actionless-ness. Without some
equipment or the other, electricity cannot, of its own
accord, manifest itself. Similarly, the Supreme cannot, and
need not project out into a Divine, or an undivine form ---
as an Immortal Omniscient God or as a mortal foolish ego
--- unless there is some desire, or the other, to precipitate
the manifestation A super-saturated solution, if left alone,
undisturbed, can carry its extra quantity of crystals in
itself; but the moment a minutest particle of the same
substance is thrown into that beaker, immediately, all the
extra crystals get thrown out in crystal-form. Similarly, the
Dynamic Supreme, the Womb of Infinite potentialities,
cannot bring forth any form, or forms, unless there is an
intention --- it may be Divine, it may be good, it may be
bad.
Then the DESIRE that made the Supreme assume the
Divine form of Krishna --- the Enchanting Cowboy, the
Blue Lover-of-All-is here explained in Vyasa's own words.
In the stanza, Vyasa makes Krishna confess His initial
"desire," that caused His manifestation.
The divinest of all "desires" is, indeed, a selfless thirst to
serve the world; but all the same it is a DESIRE. In order
to "PROTECT THE GOOD," when the Absolute starts ITs
Godly career, it is the very necessity of Maya that He, the
very Lord of Delusion, has to take upon Himself one more
added mission," THE DESTRUCTION OF THE WICKED."
267
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here 'DESTRUCTION' is not annihilation of the
individuals as much as the REMOVAL OF THE WRONG
TENDENCIES in the individuals. It is a process of refitting
the wardrobe wherein some old clothes are irredeemably
spoiled, and have to be eliminated in order to make more
space for newly-made and other refitted items. Similarly,
Prophets, when they come, they encourage the good,
sometimes they rejuvenate the bad, and often eliminate
the poisonous specimens from the garden-of-life.
This much Lord Krishna was compelled to explain about
Himself because it was perfectly evident that Arjuna was
blissfully unaware of the true Divine nature of Krishna.
The line of arguments adopted by Arjuna in the opening
chapter to justify his conduct in his friend's eyes would be
meaningless if Arjuna did not, in fact, believe that he was
addressing a human being. It would, in such a case,
suggest that Arjuna was an utter atheist who would not
rely for his victory upon his Divine companion. All the
same, when Krishna comments upon Arjuna,
characterising him as a non-caviller, a friend and a
devotee, deserving His assistance, Arjuna appeals to
Krishna, with a childlike simplicity: "DO TEACH ME, I
AM THY DISCIPLE." This was undeniably an attitude of
profound respect but no indication that Arjuna treated
Krishna as God-Almighty, Himself.
WHY IS THE LORD GIVING THIS BIT OF HIS
AUTOBIOGRAPHY?
268
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
9. He who thus knows, in true light, My divine birth and action,
having abandoned the body, he is not born again; he comes to
Me, O Arjuna.
After explaining the how and the why of incarnations in
general, Krishna declares that those who, by constant
contemplation upon this fact, understand the Divine birth
and activities of the Lord, end their limitations and reach
Godhood. That it is not a mere understanding or knowing
that is indicated here is clear from the very words, "IN
TRUE LIGHT" (Tattwatah), that is, we have to experience
subjectively how and when the Supreme Atman takes Its
Avatara in us. Today, no doubt, individually, we live as
limited mortal brutes, but, at certain moments, when we
are entertaining pure selfless "desires," the very same
Spark-of-Life in us comes to manifest a divine potency
and a celestial dash.
The stanza also subtly indicates that for one's spiritual
development, the practice of Upasana of the blissful form
of the Lord is as efficient a method as meditation upon the
formless-Self. There are some professional Vedantins who
cannot accept the concept of the Lord having an
embodiment. They are merely barking at a shadow. To
one who is practising sincerely and whole-heatedly, the
goal is equally available whether it is through the Upasana
of the Truth with a form (Saguna), or without any form
(Nirguna).
269
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna is indicating here the Supreme State-of-Perfection,
the State-of-Existence from where "ONE IS NOT BORN
AGAIN." In the earlier Vedic literature the State-of-
Godhood is described as the "State-of-Deathless-ness"
(Amaratva), while in the later Vedic literature we find a
slow change-over, and the Eternal is explained as the State
from which "ONE IS NOT BORN AGAIN" (Ajah). The
evolution of this concept clearly indicates the intellectual
development in this country at that time. When a society
is immature, its members are afraid of death; but as they
grow and evolve, it is not death that frightens them so
much as the possibility of a new birth, for, it starts a new
lease of agonising existence in imperfect environments.
It is evident that the 'State-of-Deathless-ness' is itself the
'State-of-Birthless-ness,' because death can come only to
that which is born. And yet, the change in expression
declares the maturity that was gained by the Vedic-
students of that period.
THIS PATH OF SALVATION IS NOT ONE MERELY
REASONED OUT BY KRISHNA TO SUIT HIS PRESENT
PURPOSE, BUT IT WAS WALKED EVEN IN ANCIENT
TIMES:
10. Freed from attachment, fear and anger, absorbed in Me,
taking refuge in Me, purified by the Fire-of-Knowledge, many
have attained My Being.
270
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The entire "Path-of-Self-development" and the final Goal
that is to be reached have been indicated in this stanza.
Without renouncing attachment and its by-products,
which always disturb one's mental equipoise, no progress
is ever possible for a seeker. Once this mental discipline is
gained, absorbed in the idea of Self-perfection, the seeker
comes to take total refuge in this great victory. Thereafter,
the mission of Self-perfection becomes a passion with him
to thrill his life. When an individual has thus gained this
stage of Self-development, he becomes fit for the study
and practice of
the great scriptures --- the Upanishads.
(a) The study of the scriptures at the feet of a Master,
followed by (b) independent analysis of Vedantic Truths
by oneself in an attempt to understand their real import,
and lastly, (c) the seeker's slow and steady attempt at
balancing himself in single-pointed meditation --- all these
three together constitute the technique of Self-
development as visualised in Hinduism. A study of the
theory of Vedanta and all our attempts to live the life of
tranquillity and love indicated therein, together constitute
Jnana Tapas.
There are some commentators who read into the stanza a
synthesis of all the three "Paths." The "Path-of-Action" is
indicated in the first-half of the first line, because, unless
one trains oneself in the field of activity, "DETACHMENT
FROM DESIRES, FEAR, AND ANGER" cannot be gained.
271
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The second-half, "ABSORBED IN ME AND TAKING
REFUGE IN ME" indicates the "Path-of-Love," wherein the
devotee, binding himself with love to the 'Lord of his
heart'lives his life, taking refuge in nothing other than the
Lord. The "Path-of-Knowledge" is indicated by the
discriminative analysis and the constant and continued
attempts at identification with the Self (Jnana Tapas). The
import is, that seekers walking all the seemingly different
"Paths" reach but the same Goal, the Supreme, "Me."
In fact, these three "Paths," are but three different
techniques to perfect our mind; all spiritual paths are but
attempts to purify the mind, meaning, to make it steady
and single-pointed. Some of us identify ourselves more
with our bodies than with anything else. Others are, by
temperament, living more in their mental zones. And
there are some again who live more in their rational
personalities. To all these three types of seekers, if one and
the same "path" is indicated, the chances are that the
technique prescribed will not be universal in its
acceptance and application.
But whatever be the "Path" pursued, and whatever be the
type to which the seekers belong, the ultimate experience
of Spiritual Perfection gained by every one of them at the
moment of illumination, is one and the same. This is an
incontrovertible fact, for the mystical literature of the
world reads as though every saint has borrowed and
copied from all the earlier Masters across the world!
272
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THEN LORD KRISHNA MUST BE CHERISHING
FEELINGS OF AFFECTION AND AVERSION, SINCE HE
LIBERATES SOME, AND NOT ALL. THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
11. It whatever way men approach Me, even so do I reward
them; My path do men tread in all ways, O son of Pritha.
Attachment and aversion are not the weaknesses of the
Lord. He is a mass of Dynamism, the source of all
activities and achievements. We are given the equipment
through which we can, as we like, invoke this Infinite
Mind. If we rightly invoke and carefully use the
equipments, as a reward for our intelligent self-
application, we can reach the Goal of our activities. If we
misuse them, the very same Divine Force can be the cause
of our utter disaster.
The fuel strength in the petrol can be converted into horse-
power through the mechanism under the bonnet. We can
invoke the horse-power to reach our destination, or we
can easily dump ourselves into a mass of twisted
wreckage on the way-side and become a bundle of broken
bones. These accidents are caused by the carelessness of
the driver, although the strength and power with which
the car dashes down the embankment of the road is, no
doubt, supplied by the same petrol. But the strength in the
petrol had no attachment for those whom it guided home
safe. Nor can we say that it had a hatred
273
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
for those whom it wrecked. With neither attachment nor
hatred, the petrol gives its power when invoked through
the mechanism of the engine, and how to make use of the
power depends upon us and our wisdom in employing it.
Similarly, here the Lord says, "I, AS LIFE, LEND MY
POWER TO ALL WITHOUT ANY PARTIALITY; IN
WHATEVER FORM THEY INVOKE ME, IN THAT
FORM I SERVE THEM." An electric plug in the house can
be made use of to hear a song over the radio, to cool
ourselves with the breeze of a fan, to boil water, to cook or
to warm the room with a heater; it all depends upon what
instrument we plug into it. It is never possible that
electricity flowing through the fan, of its own accord, can
start emitting fire or light. Similarly, the unmanifest
Eternal Force of Life can be invoked, and It shall fulfil all
"desires" through us according to the type of our
invocations.
IF GOD BE THUS FREE FROM ALL ATTACHMENTS
AND OTHER EVIL PASSIONS, HE, THE LORD, MUST
BE GRACIOUS TO ALL CREATURES ALIKE AND
MUST BE ABLE TO GRANT THEM ALL THEIR
DESIRES. THEN WHY IS IT THAT ORDINARILY MEN
DO NOT DESIRE TO SEEK THE LORD AND GAIN THE
INFINITE? --- LISTEN WHY IT IS SO;
274
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
12. They who long for satisfaction from actions in this world,
make sacrifices to the gods; because satisfaction is quickly
obtained from actions in the world-of-objects.
If the Atmic-force guides us on both, the path-of-good and
on the path-of-evil, then how is it that in this world of ours
we see but a rare few who are honestly trying to travel the
path-of-rightenousness, while the majority are pursuing
the road-of-evil? This question must necessarily come to
the mind of all intelligent students, and Lord Krishna is
answering this possible query. He says, whether the mind
wants to pursue an extrovert life, or live the introvert joys,
it can do so only by borrowing its capacity and capability
from the Omnipotency of the Atman; but the mind ever
chooses an extrovert career, in stinking sensuality, because
it is easy to gain cheap pleasures by satisfying the
sensuous ticklings of nerve-tips.
This is the cause for sensuality in the world, and Krishna
explains why a majority of us, inspite of our best efforts,
live a life of animal passions: "BECAUSE SUCCESS
RESULTING FROM ACTION IS QUICKLY ATTAINED
IN THE HUMAN WORLD."
On this globe of ours, the quickest results are gained when
our sense-organs come in contact with their desired
objects as the result of deliberate actions. Since a sensuous
life is a life of least resistance, though of cheap
275
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
pleasures, the ordinary man, in his keen appetite for joy
and peace, wastes his spiritual strength in hunting after,
procuring, and enjoying the fleeting sense-objects. The
truth of the statement is well within the experience of
every one of us.
The passage should not be understood only to say that
worldly success is easily gained, but that, as men, we can
intelligently plan our actions in such a way that we can,
out of our actions, create or compel nature to yield a
greater dose of happiness than the members of the
vegetable and animal kingdoms.
MEN WHO ARE SEEKING THE LOWER OR THE
HIGHER WAYS OF LIFE THROUGH THE
EMPLOYMENT OF THEIR SPIRITUAL STRENGTH CAN
BE DIVIDED, UPON THE BROAD BASIS OF THEIR
INTROVERT AND EXTROVERT NATURES; AND THE
EXTROVERT MEN CAN AGAIN BE DIVIDED INTO
FOUR TYPES, ON THE BASIS OF THEIR FINER
DISTINCTIONS OF THE TEXTURES OF THEIR
THOUGHT AND ACTION.
13. The fourfold-caste has been created by Me according to the
differentiation of GUNA an d KARMA; though I am the
author thereof know Me as non-doer and immutable.
This is a stanza that has been much misused in recent
times by the upholders of the social crime styled as the
276
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
caste system in India. Varna, meaning different shades of
texture, or colour, is employed here in the Yogic-sense. In
the Yoga Shastra, they attribute some definite colours to
the triple gunas, which mean, as we have said earlier, "the
mental temperaments." Thus, Sattwa is considered as
white, Rajas as red, and Tamas as black. Man is essentially
the thoughts that he entertains. From individual to
individual, even when the thoughts are superficially the
same, there are clear distinctions recognizable from their
temperaments.
On the basis of these temperamental distinctions, the
entire mankind has been, for the purpose of spiritual
study, classified into four "castes" of Varnas. Just as, in a
metropolis, on the basis of trade or professions, we divide
the people as doctors, advocates, professors, traders,
politicians, tongawalas, etc., so too, on the basis of the
different textures of thoughts entertained by the
intelligent creatures, the four "castes" had been labelled in
the past. From the standpoint of the State, a doctor and a
tongawala are as much important as an advocate and a
mechanic. So too, for the perfectly healthy life of a society,
all "castes" should not be competitive but co-operative
units, each being complementary to the others, never
competing among themselves.
However, later on, in the power politics of the early
middle-ages in India, this communal feeling cropped up
in its present ugliness, and in the general ignorance
among the ordinary people at that time, the cheap pandits
277
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
could parade their assumed knowledge by quoting, IN
BITS, stanzas like this one.
The decadent Hindu-Brahmin found it very convenient to
quote the first quarter of the stanza, and repeat "I
CREATED THE FOUR varnas," and give this tragic social
vivisection a divine look having a godly sanction. They,
who did this, were in fact, the greatest blasphemers that
Hinduism ever had to reckon with. For Vyasa, in the very
same line of the couplet, as though in the very same
breath, describes the basis on which this classification was
made, when he says, "BY THE DIFFERENTIATION OF
THE MENTAL QUALITY AND PHYSICAL ACTION (OF
THE PEOPLE)."
This complete definition of the Varna not only removes
our present misunderstanding but also provides us with
some data to understand its true significance. Not by birth
is man a Brahmana (Brahmin); by cultivating good
intentions and noble thoughts alone can we ever aspire to
Brahmana-hood; nor can we pose as Brahmana merely
because of our
external physical marks, or bodily actions in the outer
world. The definition insists that he alone is a Brahmana,
whose thoughts are as much Sattwic, as his actions are. A
Kshatriya is one who is Rajasic in his thoughts and actions.
A Shudra is not only one whose thoughts are Tamasic, but
also he who lives a life of low endeavours, for satisfying
his base animal passions and flesh-appetites. The scientific
278
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
attitude in which this definition has been declared, is clear
from the exhaustive implications of the statement:
"ACCORDING TO THE DIFFERENTIATION OF "guna"
AND "karma."
We had tried to explain how the Self, functioning through
Its own self-forgetfulness (Maya) as it were, came to
project forth temperamentally in three distinct conditions
of mental and intellectual life: Unactivity, Activity and
Inactivity. Through these triple channels flow the
expressions of Life manifesting the different ideas,
agitations and actions of the embodied-Life. None of the
vagaries of existence would have been possible if the
equipments were not tickled by the touch-of-Life.
Krishna, as the very Source of Life, emphatically asserts
here, that He is the author of it all, in the sense that the
ocean could say that it is the author of all the waves,
ripples, foam, bubbles, etc., and gold can assert that it is
the very creator and sustainer of all gold-ornaments in the
world, inasmuch as no gold-ornament can exist when the
gold element is removed from it.
But, at the same time the Infinite, being All-Pervading, as
we have already explained, cannot participate in any
action and therefore, the Lord, in one and the same breath,
declares that though "HE IS THE AUTHOR OF IT," in His
own Real Nature," HE IS AT THE SAME TIME A NON-
DOER."
279
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Such contradictions in Vedanta become confusing to the
students, as long as they are not initiated into the
SECRETS OF ITS STUDY. In our conversation, we
generally hear people say "that they reached their
destination ten miles away by sitting in a bus;" "I caught a
train and reached here." Since we understand it in our
usual routine conversation, we do not try to dissect such
statements to discover the contradictions they contain.
Sitting you cannot travel. By catching a train, none can
cover distances. And yet it is so true. When we travel in a
bus or a train, we donot move; we only sit and hang on to
our seats! But stillwe cover the distance because the
vehicle in which we sit, moves on. In other words, the
motion of the vehicle is attributed to us. Similarly, the
creation of the temperaments, which should be attributed
to the mind and intellect, is attributed to the Lord. In fact,
the Lord, in His Essential Nature, being Changeless and
All-Pervading, is neither the Doer nor the Creator.
SINCE I AM NOT IN REALITY THE AUTHOR OF
THOSE ACTIONS OF WHICH YOU THINK ME TO BE
AN AUTHOR:
14. Actions do not taint Me, nor have I any desire for the fruits-
of-actions. He who knows Me thus is not bound by his actions.
The Ever-pure and the All-full cannot be tainted, nor can
It have any sense-of-imperfection which can germinate
any "desire." The Lord, the Self, declares here: "ACTIONS
280
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DO NOT TAINT ME NOR HAVE I ANY ANXIETY FOR
THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS." Taint or "desire" can come
only to an ego, which is "the Self, functioning through a
given mind and intellect." When the subtle-body is tainted
by "desires" and agitations then the ego in it seems to be
played upon by these two. This is better understood by
the following analogy.
The sun, reflected in a bowl of water, is entirely
dependent upon the condition of the water. The reflected-
sun is shaken when the water in the bowl is disturbed and
it appears to be dim when the water is muddy. Neither the
dimness nor the agitations of the reflection have caused
any change at all in the original object --- the sun in the
Infinite Heavens. Similarly, the ego suffers the evil
tendencies and such other taints of the mind and also gets
disturbed, due to the "desires" for the FRUITS OF ITS
ACTIONS. The Self, in Its Pure Conscious-nature, is not at
all affected by these delusory disturbances of Its own
reflection in the mental pool.
THIS SEEMS TO BE A NOVEL INTERPRETATION OF
THE USUAL VEDIC TECHNIQUE OF SELF-
PERFECTION. IS THERE ANY PRECEDENT?... LISTEN:
15. Having known this, the ancient seekers-after-freedom also
performed action; therefore, you too perform action, as did the
ancients in the olden times.
281
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After knowing Me that "I AM NON-AGENT AND I
HAVE NO LONGING FOR THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS,"
and realising the All-full Self-hood, there shall no more be
any "desire" or "egoistic vanities." The technique of Karma
Yoga, as enunciated and propounded in the last chapter,
was practised, says Krishna, even in olden times by many
an intelligent seeker. In short, there is nothing new in the
"Path-of-Action" and all seekers trying to realise the Self
had been following the same technique.
"IF 'KARMA YOGA' IS TO BE PERFORMED, I CAN DO IT
BECAUSE OF YOUR ADVICE. BUT WHY SHOULD YOU
ADD THAT THE ANCIENTS DID THE SAME?" IN
REPLY TO THIS THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN, THERE IS
GREAT DIFFICULTY IN UNDERSTANDING WHAT
CONSTITUTES RIGHT ACTION"... HOW?
16. What is action? What is inaction? As to this even the
"wise" are deluded. Therefore, I shall teach you "action" (the
nature of action and inaction) , knowing which, you shall be
liberated from the evil (of SAMSARA --- the wheel of birth and
death) .
All of us understand that 'ACTION' means movement of
the limbs with relation to things in the outer world, and
'INACTION' means a state of existence wherein there is a
total cessation of such vigorous and conscious
movements. This is the popular definition of 'action' and
'inaction' which, no doubt, is quite acceptable as far as the
282
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
every-day activities of life are concerned. But from the
philosophical stand-point, the concept and features of
both 'action' and 'inaction' change.
For purposes of self-development, when we consider
'action,' it is not to be valued merely by observing its
manifested qualities but we must also take into
consideration the un-manifested but subtly-working
motives behind the very same action. An action, in itself,
cannot be considered either as good or bad. It is the
MOTIVE BEHIND IT which determines the quality of the
action. Just as the beauty of a fruit is not the last word for
its edibility, but it depends upon its contents, so too, a
beautiful action in itself could be a poisonous act of
criminality, if the motive behind it is low and vicious.
Therefore, it is said that, in discriminating between what
is 'action' and what is 'inaction,' "EVEN THE POET-SEERS
OF OLD ARE CONFUSED." The word 'Kavi,' now-a-days
mainly used for the poets, was the name for the Rishis, the
Seers of Upanishadic declarations. Any inspired man,
recognising and expressing a truth that was noble and
immortal, was called a Kavi.
After stating this difficult problem of discriminating
between 'action' and 'inaction,' Krishna promises here that
He will teach Arjuna what exactly constitutes right action,
by knowing which, naturally, one can save one's self from
all evil.
283
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IT IS FAMILIAR TO ALL, THAT ACTION MEANS
MOVEMENT, AND INACTION MEANS ABSENCE OF
IT: TO SIT QUIET. WHAT IS THERE TO LEARN ABOUT
THEM?
17. For verily (the true nature) of "right action" should be
known; also (that) of "forbidden (or unlawful) action" and of
"inaction" ; imponderable is the nature (path) of action.
Life means activity. Where activity has ended, death has
entered. In active life alone can we progress or deteriorate.
A stagnant pool of water decays and soon gets putrefied;
while the flowing water of a river ever keeps itself fresh,
pure and clean.
Life being dynamic, it cannot, even for a moment, cease to
function. Complete cessation from activities is impossible
so long as life exists.
Activity, therefore, is the very corner-stone of life. Since
man must always actively exist all his lifetime, the entire
possibilities of activities have been taken into
consideration by the great Seers of old in evaluating life.
The accompanying chart will vividly explain their
classifications.
Life is constituted of moments of activity and moments of
inactivity. Through inactivity, neither progress nor
deterioration is ever possible. Deep-sleep or periods of
284
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
complete cessation in existence are intervals of total
holidaying from life, and they can neither make nor
marthe individual's progress in his evolution.
Periods of activity create man. This creative-period
depends upon what type of activity we venture upon.
According to the ancient Seers, activities can be of two
types, constructive or destructive. Constructive activities
which contribute towards the evolution of the individual
are termed here as Karma.
Destructive activities are those that are totally condemned
by the Shastras, because they tend to devolve the
individual, and those are termed in our text books as Vi-
karma. The constructive activities (Karma) can be of three
kinds: Nitya --- constant duties, Naimittika --- special
duties on special occasions, and Kamya --- work
purposeful and self-determined for winning a desirable
result or reward.
Built upon the ancient Vedic doctrine, Krishna here
expounds an elaborate theory of self-development. He
says that life is but a name for continuous activities. These
activities can fall within two distinct classifications as
Karma and Vi-karma. Lord Krishna's advice to Arjuna is to
avoid the forbidden actions (Vi-karma) and to pursue the
constructive and creative activities of self-development
(Karma). In this scientific analysis, without any formality,
or mental reservation, Krishna totally rejects "inactivity"
(A-karma).
285
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is necessary, it is said here, that a true seeker who is
trying to live a diligent life, contributing to his material
progress and to his spiritual self-development, must
necessarily know this triple classification of life,
considered as a bundle
of activities.
Even after so beautifully defining the three clear and
distinct classifications, Krishna admits that, for an
ordinary man it is not easy to distinguish the one from the
other, and to readily and successfully classify all his
activities under these three headings, because, Krishna
says, "THE NATURE OF KARMA IS IMPONDERABLE. "
In this statement lies the secret suggestion that an action is
to be evaluated not merely on its face value but after a
sincere consideration of the motive working behind it. If
the motive, or desire, or intention of one is pure and
constructive, then the action too is noble and meritorious
for that particular individual. Since in this evaluation of
actions the individual factor is so very predominant, one
must agree with Krishna over the imponderability of the
nature of Karma.
WHAT IS THERE TO LEARN ABOUT ACTION AND
INACTION? THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
286
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
18. He who recognises inaction in action and action in inaction
is wise among men; he is a YOGI and a true performer of all
actions.
By thus following the rules of right-living (Karma), as
indicated in Vedanta, when an individual has lived a
sufficiently long period of time, the doubt arises as to
when exactly we can say that he has completely reached
the State of Perfection. This question should necessarily
throb in the intellect of all sincere students, and Krishna is
trying to indicate this noble goal of fulfilment of all Karmas
in this stanza.
Action, as we have already seen, is a gross expression in
the outer world of some known, or unknown, deep
"desire" in the intellect. A complete "STATE OF
ACTIONLESS-NESS" would be necessarily the 'STATE OF
DESIRELESS-NESS" or the "STATE OF INFINITE GOD-
HEAD." But the goal indicated here is not this "STATE OF
INFINITE PERFECTION," but only a wayside station on
the pilgrimage. A true and diligent man can discover and
recognise in himself that even in physical inaction there
can be an intense mental and intellectual activity, and he
can also recognise that he, even in the most intense
activities, himself as an observer of it, is revelling in
"unactivity" (A-Karma). This is the maximum Sattwic state.
Such an individual has thereby reached a State of Great
Equanimity, which is almost unavoidable in living a
successful life of meditation. It is not said here, as it is
287
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
usually believed, that right action itself will take us to the
Infinite. This is impossible. As action itself is a child of
"desire," through action alone we can create things; and
created 'results' are, in their very nature, finite. Thus, a
God-head reached through activity can only be a Sunday-
God-head which must depart from us the following
Monday morning!
Shankara and other great Acharyas have all been tirelessly
repeating that, right action, undertaken with a sense of
devotion and dedication, creates in the bosom of the
student a sense of complete detachment, as though he
himself is a disinterested observer of all that is happening
within and without him. When thus an individual
detaches himself and observes his own activities as part
and parcel of the world of activities around, he gains in
himself an indescribable poise which is essential for the
practice of meditation.
Merely because an individual is keeping quiet, we cannot
ever conclude that he is inactive. Physical inactivity is no
criterion to call one an idler. On the other hand, it is a fact
well-known to all of us, that, when we are intensely
thinking --- whenever we are in a state of creative thinking
--- we are invariably quiet and inactive, physically.
Therefore, in the physical inactivity of one, which is
labelled as idleness by the hectic foot-path-walkers in life,
we can detect intense activity in his deep "within." A
Buddha under the fig-tree, an artist at his easel, a musician
at his instrument, a writer at his desk --- all of them
288
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
punctuate their activities with 'still moments of intense
inactivity'-called unactivity-and they bend forward to
pour out their artistic and literary creations. All these
physical moments of cessation are not mere inactivity but
they are the necessary quietude and silence when the
mind and intellect function with the highest velocity.
Thus, he who has a capacity to introspect, can easily detect
perfect action in complete inaction.
As I am writing these words a certain part in me can stand
apart and visualise how my fingers, constituted of mere
minerals, can hold the pen at the right slant and carry it
along the paper so that the words may be spelt properly
thereon. So, in all activities, this capacity to visualise
discriminatingly our own activity --- this capacity to
observe ourselves functioning in a given field with or
without the other members of the community --- is not
very rare and those who can do it can realise how, inspite
of all our activities, the observer in us which OBSERVES
the activities is most INACTIVE.
The train runs, but not the steam. The fan moves, but not
the electricity. The fuel burns, but not the fire. The body,
mind and intellect function and act, but not the Self, the
Life in them!
Such an individual who can thus stand constantly apart
from himself and observe "the activity in inactivity" and
"complete inactivity even in the highest activity... called
289
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
UNACTIVITY"... is termed here, we must carefully note,
not a man of realisation (Jnani), but an intelligent, full-
grown human creature (Buddhiman). "He is the intelligent
one among men," and he is certainly one who is very near
to the Self (Atma Yuktah).
In short, desireless activities, when undertaken and
performed in a spirit of dedication, purify us, and the
intellect thereby gains a new keenness. Out of such a
purified head, a new faculty, as it were, arises. The
capacity to observe oneself as an actor on the stage of life,
is a capacity divine and noble, inasmuch as it immediately
redeems us from our selfish preoccupations with life's
ever-changing incidents and accidents.
REALISATION OF 'INACTION IN ACTION' AND
'ACTION IN INACTION' IS EXTOLLED AS FOLLOWS:
19. Whose undertakings are all devoid of desires and purposes,
and whose actions have been burnt by the Fire-of-Knowledge,
him the "wise" call a Sage.
He is called a Saint, a man-of-Perfection, "whose
undertakings are all devoid of plan and desire-for-result."
Planning is a shackle upon the freedom of one's activities.
In all planning, we are forcing the circumstances into a
desired mould, a wished-for pattern. In thus driving the
situations to mould themselves into a planned pattern, we
are exhausting ourselves and vainly fighting against
290
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
terrible odds. This method of activity drains away all
inspiration and joy from the worker.
We have already discussed how the desire-for-results
during any activity dissipates our energies. The fruits-of-
an-action can only mature in a future period of time and
therefore, to court the results is to escape from the present
and live in the unborn periods of time. It is a law that the
effects depend entirely upon the causes, and so to be
sincere and complete in our activities is the greatest
guarantee for all successful achievements.
One who is a perfect Sage, says Krishna, is one who will
undertake to act "WITHOUT PLANNING" and
"WITHOUT ANY DESIRE FOR FRUITS." In this context,
these two qualifications of a perfect act are to be
understood with kindness and sympathy. A literal
meaning of these two terms should not be used here, as in
that case the statement would become absurd.
The instruction to act "WITHOUT PLANNING AND
DESIRE" does not mean that a man-of-Equilibrium, in his
inspired activity, should not make use of his better
intelligence and plan his activities to gain a desired result.
It only means that, WHILE HE IS AT WORK, he should
not allow his abilities and capacities to run to waste, with
his mental preoccupations and sentimental fears
regarding the results-of-his-work. Vedanta does not in any
way ignore man's intellect. The way of life as advised in
the Geeta provides only a more efficient means to act and
291
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
achieve, to live and to enjoy, cultivating and applying our
own potentialities more intelligently.
An individual, who has thus come to live intelligently and
act diligently, becomes fully wedded to the piece of work
in hand and gets so entirely drunk with the joy of his own
inspiration, that the action cannot leave upon him even a
trace of its reaction. Our mind and intellect will venture
forth to worry over the unknown possibilities and
dangers, unless they can find a more secure hold upon
something nobler and diviner. A perfect Sage is one
whose mind is ever hitched on to the cognition of the
Divine, so that, even when he functions in the world
outside, he is revelling in his own Consciousness within.
By thus painting the psychology of a Sage-at-work, Lord
Krishna is indicating with what mental attitude and
intellectual composure, Arjuna, a seeker, should enter his
fields of activity. These instructions, given by Vyasa
through the mouth of Krishna, are meant for all
generations of seekers and, therefore, words addressed to
Arjuna are also words addressed to you and to me.
When my son wants to become a doctor I would certainly
explain to him the story of the struggle of some known
doctors, so that my son may understand how best he
himself can become a true doctor. So too here, by the
description of a perfect Sage-at-work, Arjuna is being
initiated into the "Path of Self-development," which he is
to follow faithfully, if he is to reach the goal of life.
292
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DEVOID OF ALL DESIRE-PROMPTED ACTIONS, AND
ATTACHMENTS TO THEIR RESULTS, AND
THEREFORE, HAVING NO SELFISH END IN VIEW,
WHEN A SAGE PERFORMS KINDLY ACTS IN THE
COMMUNITY, HE REALLY DOES NO ACTION; HIS
ACTION IS EQUIVALENT TO "INACTION," SINCE
ALL HIS ACTIONS ARE CONSUMED IN THE FIRE OF
KNOWLEDGE. TO TEACH THIS "UNACTIVITY," THE
LORD SAYS:
20. Having abandoned attachment to the fruits-of-action, ever-
content, depending on nothing, he does not do anything, though
engaged in actions.
We are not asked here to renounce the fruits-of-actions as
such nor to ignore them, but we are only warned to
renounce our MENTAL SLAVERY and INTELLECTUAL
CLINGING to the "expected-fruits." Only when we get
preoccupied with
the expected fruits of our actions do we come to exhaust
ourselves, and thus become inefficient in our activities.
Forsaking (tyaktwa) our clinging (Sanga) to the fruits-of-
action (Karma-phala), we are advised to strive for and to
achieve the welfare of the society.
A true painter never willingly sells his masterpiece! To
him, that piece of canvas upon which he has lavished long
293
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
periods of effort, is now by itself a complete reward, even
if he be starving!! As compared to the satisfaction and joy
that it gives to the painter, he feels that even all the wealth
in the world would but be too little a payment for it. If a
mere finite piece of art could thus give to an ignorant man
of agitations and desires, such an invaluable joy, how
much more intense must be the diviner joys of a perfect
saint working in the world of names and forms? Indeed,
the Self-realised Ones, after their experience of the Infinite
Reality as their own Self, become perfectly independent of
everything else.
Again, the anxiety for the fruits-of-action, the sense of
discontentment and the feeling of dependency upon the
things and beings of the world --- all belong to the
misconceived notion of the ego-centre. The ego in us is the
sufferer of all the above-mentioned incapacities and
inabilities. When the seeker-after-Truth rediscovers his
ego to be the Infinite Truth, the limited ego ends its career
of sorrow, and naturally, the agony and the incapacities of
the imperfect ego also end. The reflection of the sun in a
cup of water can be broken up when the water in the cup
is shaken. But when the water is poured out, the reflection
also ends, and no more can the sun in the sky be shaken
by any known method.
Such an individual, who has rediscovered the Self,
"THOUGH SEEMINGLY ENGAGED IN ACTIVITY," does
not do anything.
294
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The body, mind, and intellect act in the world-of-objects,
but not the All-pervading Self --- the Life --- in us. Without
'Life' the body cannot function; but when the body
functions, 'Life' as such cannot be said to function.
Therefore, one who is established in the Self, though he
engaged himself in action, cannot be said to do any action.
The train may move but it would be incorrect to say that
the steam is moving.
It is generally a doubt in the students that, even if all the
reactions of the past actions have ended at the time of Self-
re-discovery, when such a prophetic Master undertakes
activity in the world, he would, perhaps, be initiating new
actions of sins and merits for the enjoyment of which he
may again have to take up births. This false idea has been
completely eradicated in this stanza. After the God-
experience, when the saint functions in the world outside,
"THOUGH ENGAGED IN ACTION HE DOES NOT DO
ANYTHING."
EVERY ACTION HAS A REACTION. NATURALLY,
EVEN THE BODILY ACTIONS OF A SAINT SHOULD
HAVE SOME REACTION. THIS IS THE ORDINARY
ARGUMENT. TO NEGATE THIS ASSUMPTION THE
LORD SAYS:
21. Without hope, with the mind and Self controlled, having
abandoned all possessions, doing mere bodily action, he incurs
no sin.
295
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Mere bodily activity is not action that will merit a reaction.
It has already been seen that the reactions of actions take
place in the mental and in the intellectual zones. An action
can leave a mark on our subtle-body only when we act
with an ego-centric consciousness that we are the actors,
and these marks can be effective only when our actions
are motivated by powerful and strong ego-centric
"desires."
Ego is created only when the Self, in its assumed delusion,
identifies itself with the body, mind, and intellect and
their respective fields of objects. This ego draws its
sustenance from the "hopes of the future," and also from
the "satisfaction of the present" possessions.
Therefore, the stanza declares that an individual, (a) when
he has completely renounced hope, (b) when he has
brought his body and mind under perfect control, and (c)
when he has relinquished all possessions, can no longer
sustain the illusory concept of the ego in him. When the
ego has ended, the actions performed by that individual's
body become incapable of leaving any permanent mark
upon his mental constitution, or on his intellectual
character.
In sleep if I become naked I am not charged of any
indecent behaviour; if, in my sleep, my body kicks my
own son, I am not accused of cruelty to my child. For, in
both the above cases we know that "for the actions of my
body I am not responsible, since I was absent in that body
296
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
during those activities." This clearly shows that the ego-
centric identity with the body is the actor and the sufferer,
and where the ego is not, there the mere bodily actions
cannot bring about any consequences.
A Self-realised Saint's activities do not touch him at all
since he is not the actor; the actions only flow through
him. Such a truly Great One becomes not a doer of actions,
but serves as a glorious instrument for the Lord's Will to
express itself.
If the music coming from a violin is not good, the
audience does not attack the violin, although the violinist
cannot be very safe! The violin, of its own accord, does not
make music but it allows music to emanate from it at the
touch of the flying bow and the tickling fingers of the
performer. Its duties end when its supple chords have
bent under the touch of the musician's dancing fingers. An
ego-less man-of-Perfection is the "wonder instrument"
through which the Divine orchestra plays, singing the
song of the Lord's own Will, faithfully. Any activity
undertaken by a Perfect Master does not and cannot bring
about any consequences, good orevil, upon him; he is only
a "Divine-instrument."
THOUGH A SELF-REALISED MAN RENOUNCES ALL
ACTIONS, HE HAS, OF NECESSITY, TO BARELY
MAINTAIN HIS BODY; SUCH A MAN STEADY ON
297
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE' IS EVER LIBERATED.
TO TEACH THIS THE LORD SAYS:
22. Content with what comes to him without effort, free from the
pairs-of-opposites and envy, even-minded in success and failure,
though acting he is not bound.
Such an individual, who has gone beyond his own ego,
can thereafter commence no desire-prompted activity
with any definite fruit-motive. Naturally he will feel quite
contented and happy in whatever gain spontaneously
rises out of his actions. The state-of-egolessness indicates a
condition of perfect conquest over the mind and intellect.
Naturally therefore, the pairs-of-opposites --- heat and
cold, success and failure, good and bad, joy and sorrow,
etc. --- cannot affect him, they being always the
interpretations of the world-of-objects by the mind.
Where the mind has ended, the intellect too can no more
bring its own affections and prejudices, or its spirit of
competitions and jealousies. We generally get agitated due
to the pulls of success and failure. On the rising tide of
success our ego dances in a vain joy, while in the hollows
of failures it feels miserable and crushed. But when the
ego is completely divinised, the individual will, thereafter,
automatically remain equanimous in both success and
failure. Such an individual who has thus conquered his
ego-centric misconceptions about himself, "THOUGH
298
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ACTING, IS NOT FETTERED" by the natural
consequences of the actions performed (Karma-phala).
When such a Perfect-Master-of-Realisation lives amidst us
he is generally seen to act in no way different from an
ordinary sensible man, and yet, all the same, his activities
show an extra dynamic capacity to carve out a more
complete and enduring success. According to the Lord's
words, the activities of a man-of-Knowledge do not, in
any sense of the term, affect him. Naturally, it becomes a
little difficult for an ordinary man to know readily how
this is accomplished by the sage.
TO EXPLAIN THE DIVINE MOTIVE AND ATTITUDE
WITH WHICH MEN-OF-PERFECTION ACT IN THE
WORLD, THE FOLLOWING NINE STANZAS ARE
DECLARED BY THE LORD:
23. Of one who is devoid of attachment, who is liberated, whose
mind is established in knowledge, who acts for the sake of
sacrifice, all his actions are dissolved.
A Man-of-Wisdom has been fully comprehended in the
first line of this stanza. The qualifications are beautifully
enumerated serially and they themselves explain the
"Path-to-Perfection." Economy of words is the very
essence of the style in all Scriptural books. Even so, they
are particularly careful to use the most suggestive terms
for their purpose and take an artistic joy in ordering the
299
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
very sequence of the words used; here is a brilliant
example of it.
DEVOID OF ATTACHMENT (Gatasangah) --- The divinity
attained by the Rishis is not a new status strangely
acquired by them from some unknown and secret
quarters. It is only a rediscovery of the Perfection that is
already in each one. We are self-exiled from ourselves due
to our attachments with the finite world-of-objects. Thus a
"wise" man is he, from whom all his attachments with the
finite things of the world have dropped away.
LIBERATED (Muktah) --- The majority of seekers have
only a vague idea of what this "liberation" means. The
bondages are created upon our personality and life by
none other than ourselves. These bondages, infinite in
their number, are produced by the subtle chords of our
own attachments with things. The deluded ego feels
fulfilled only through the world-of-objects. Thus, as a
body, it gets attached to the world of its sense-objects; as a
mind it lives enslaved to the world of emotions; and as an
intellect, it gets bound with its own ideas.
WITH MIND CENTRED IN KNOWLEDGE (Jnana-
avasthita-chetasah) --- The above phenomenon of perfect
detachment, which produces a sense of complete
liberation, can be accomplished only when the mind of the
seeker gets centred in right discriminative knowledge and
develops for itself a capacity to distinguish between the
300
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
permanent and the impermanent, the fleeting and the
lasting.
A Perfect Sage, who has thus cut himself free from all
attachments, with his mind well-balanced under the light
of his own "Wisdom," becomes completely liberated from
the chains of all moral debilities, ethical imperfections,
and sensuous appetites. Such a Sage too performs work
for the rest of his life in his perfected manifestations.
Krishna says that all such activities undertaken and
performed by him are ever done in a spirit of 'dedicated
activity' (Yajna). When a Sage thus functions in a spirit of
Yajna, that action itself does not and cannot produce any
reaction, or forging of thicker bondages with newly-
formed vasanas.
The term 'Yajna,' borrowed from our scriptures, is
employed here by Krishna to yield a more elaborate sense
implying a wider and a more universal application. In the
Geeta, the Vedic Yajna has become "a self-dedicated
activity performed in a spirit of service to the many." All
actions, performed without ego, and not motivated by
one's ego-centric desires, fall under the category of Yajna.
All through the NEXT SIX STANZAS we get an
enumeration of something like twelve different Yajnas
which can be practised by everybody, on all occasions, in
every field, under all conditions.
301
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When a sage of the description given in the stanza,
performs actions in a spirit of Yajna, they dissolve away
without leaving any impression upon his mind, just as the
rainbow that disappears when the thin shower falling
against the sunlight ends.
IF THIS BE SO, THE QUESTION ARISES --- " FOR WHAT
REASON THEN DO ALL ACTIONS WHICH HE
PERFORMS ENTIRELY DISSOLVE, WITHOUT
PRODUCING THEIR NATURAL RESULTS?" LISTEN
WHY IT IS SO:
24. BRAHMAN is the oblation; BRAHMAN is the clarified
butter, etc. , constituting the offerings; by BRAHMAN is the
oblation poured into the fire of BRAHMAN; BRAHMAN
verily shall be reached by him who always sees BRAHMAN in
all actions.
This is a famous stanza which is chanted throughout India
as a prayer at the table before the Hindus eat their meals,
although, today, ninety per cent of those who chant this
stanza before their meals do not understand or care to
follow its meaning. All the same it contains infinite
suggestions and almost summarises the entire philosophic
content of Vedanta.
The Infinite Reality, which is the changeless substratum
behind and beneath the changing panorama of the world,
is indicated by the Vedic term Brahman, and this is
contrasted with that aspect of Truth which functions in
302
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and through the body as the Atman. But though the
Eternal Truth has been thus indicated by two different
terms, Vedanta roars that "The Atman is Brahman."
The metaphor is borrowed from the very well-known
divine ritualism of the Vedas, the Yajnas. In every Yajna
there are four essential factors --- (1) the deity invoked to
whom the oblations are offered, (2) the fire in which the
offerings are poured, (3) the material things that constitute
the offerings and (4) the individual who is performing the
Yajna.
Here the stanza explains the mental attitude and the
experience of the Perfect-Sage when he performs the
Yajna. To him Truth alone exists and not the delusory
plurality which his erstwhile ignorance had conjured up
for him in his mind. Therefore, to him, all Yajnas arise
from Brahman; (III-14, 15) in which Brahman, the Truth, is
the performer; offering Brahman, the material; to the
sacred fire, which is also nothing other than Brahman;
invoking but Brahman. When one wave jumps over
another and breaks itself upto embrace and become one
with its comrade, we, who know that "all waves are
nothing but the ocean," can certainly understand that in
this act of union between two waves nothing has
happened except that the ocean rising over the ocean,
broke itself to become one with the ocean!!
If an individual can thus see the substratum, or the
essential nature, in and through, all names and forms,
303
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
actions and behaviours, to him, irrespective of all
conditions and circumstances, all beings and things are
but a remembrance of the Infinite Blissful Truth. If actions
are performed by a Saint, invoking no deity other than
Brahman, "ALL HIS ACTIONS DISSOLVE AWAY"
because he is invoking but the One Truth through all his
actions.
The significance of the stanza as "a prayer to be said
before food" is amply self-evident. To live we must eat.
Food is necessary for existence. Whatever be the type of
food, when one is hungry one will enjoy one's meals. The
suggestion is that even at this moment of natural
enjoyment, we are not to forget the great Truth that it is
Brahman eating Brahman, and that during our meals we are
offering to Brahman, the food that is Brahman, invoking
nothing but the grace of Brahman. To keep this idea
constantly in the mind is to get perfectly detached from
the enjoyment and raise ourselves to a greater and endless
beatitude which is the reward of Super-manhood.
AFTER REPRESENTING THE VERY SPIRIT IN ALL
"YAJNAS," THE LORD IS TRYING TO SHOW ARJUNA
HOW ALL THROUGH LIFE, ALL OUR ACTIONS CAN
BE CONVERTED TO BECOME A "YAJNA." RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE ("BHAVANA") MAKES EVERY ACT A
"YAJNA." LISTEN:
304
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
25. Some YOGIS perform sacrifice to DEVAS alone (DEVA-
YAJNA) ; while others offer "sacrifice" as sacrifice by the Self,
in the Fire of BRAHMAN (BRAHMA-YAJNA) .
In the following few stanzas, Lord Krishna is explaining
the mental attitude of a Saint-at-Work. One doubt is
generally raised by every intelligent student at all times.
The spiritual experience, no doubt, can be had when the
seeker in meditation transcends even his intellect. But
then, this transcendental experience is bound to remain
only for a limited time. The "Realised-Saint" is found
working in the world, sometimes, in an elaborate fashion,
like a Buddha or a Christ; in some cases he works in a
limited fashion, like a Ramana Maharshi, and at certain
moments he may not undertake any activity at all, but
merely continue living among the world-of-objects. Now
the doubt is: "what would be the mental attitude of such a
Perfect-Master when he comes in contact with the world
and functions in it?"
A Yogi is one who is always trying, through all the means
that are in him, to raise himself from his state of physical,
mental and intellectual imperfections to a more perfect
state of existence. In this sense of the term it would be
unjust to read into the stanza merely the obvious
meaning.
The word "Deva" comes from a root, meaning
'illumination.' Subjectively viewed, the greatest "Devas"
are the five sense organs: eyes illumining forms and
305
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
colours, ears illumining sounds, the nose illumining
smells, and the tongue and the skin illumining tastes and
touches. Seekers, and Perfected-Masters (Yogis) too, when
they move in the world, no doubt perceive sense-objects
through sense stimuli. But in their understanding and
experience, perception is but "a world of sense-objects
continuously offering themselves into the fires of his
perception in order to invoke the Devas (Sense-
perceptions)." Such seekers and masters walk out into life,
and when they come across the sense world, they only
recognise and experience that the world-of-objects is
paying a devoted tribute to the powers of sense-
perceptions!
When this mental attitude is entertained constantly by a
seeker he comes to feel completely detached from the
sense experiences and, irrespective of the quality of
experience, he is able to maintain a constant sense of
inward equanimity.
As contrasted with this method (Deva-Yajna) there are
others who perform Brahma-Yajna, says Krishna, wherein
they come to "OFFER THE SELF AS A SACRIFICE BY
THE SELF IN THE FIRE OF THE SELF." This statement
becomes perfectly clear when subjectively analysed and
understood. As long as we exist in the body manifestation,
we have to come across the world of sense-objects. The
outer-world can yield to us its joy or sorrow not by itself
but only as a result of our healthy or unhealthy attitude
306
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
towards it. The objects in themselves are impotent to give
us either joy or sorrow.
The Perfect Masters understand that the sense-organs are
only INSTRUMENTS-of-perception and that they can
work only when in contact with the Supreme, the Atman.
In this true understanding all Masters live, allowing the
sense-organs to sacrifice themselves in the Knowledge-of-
Brahman. Seekers also are, by this statement, advised as to
how they too can gain a certain amount of freedom from
their senses by dedicating their sense-life in the service of
the world. When an individual's sense-organs of
perception and action are to function and act --- not for his
own ego-centric, selfish satisfactions but for the sake of
serving the society or the world --- then, even if such an
individual lives in the world-of-objects he will not be
enslaved by his attachments to his possessions.
AFTER THUS ENUMERATING THE "DEVA-YAJNA"
AND THE "BRAHMA-YAJNA," LORD KRISHNA
EXPOUNDS TWO MORE METHODS IN THE
FOLLOWING:
26. Some again offer hearing and other senses as sacrifice in the
fires-of-restraint; others offer sound and other objects of sense as
sacrifice in the fires-of-the-senses.
SOME OTHER GREAT MASTERS OFFER HEARING
AND OTHER SENSES IN THE FIRES-OF-RESTRAINT ---
In all these Yajnas described, the metaphor is taken from
307
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the most familiar ritualism known at the time to Arjuna.
Oblations were offered, in Vedic ritualism, into the sacred-
fire in order to invoke the blessings of the deity. In these
examples, we are shown how when some materials are
offered into a sacred-fire, not only the oblations get burnt
up and consumed by the fire, but also, as a result, a great
blessing accrues. Here, it is said that some Masters live on
in life constantly offering their senses into the fire-of-self-
control, so that the senses, of their own accord get burnt
up, contributing a greater freedom and joy in the inner life
of the man. It is also a fact, very well experienced by all of
us, that the more we try to satisfy the sense-organs the
more riotous they become and loot away our inner joy. By
self-control alone can the sense-organs be fully controlled
and mastered. This is yet another method shown to the
seekers by which they can come to experience and live a
more intense life of deeper meditation.
If in this method the "Path-of-Sense-control" is indicated,
in the second line the "Path-of-Mind-control" is suggested.
The mind is sustained and fed by the stimuli that reach it
from the outer world. The sense-objects perceived by the
organs create and maintain the mind. The mind can never
function in a field which cannot be interpreted in terms of
the five types of sense-objects. Therefore, to make the
mind non-receptive to the perceptions of the Indriyas is a
method by which one can gain a better poise in life for
purposes of meditation. Such an individual who has
controlled the mind completely and withdrawn it totally
from the sense-centres is indicated here when the Lord
308
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
says: "OTHERS OFFER SOUND AND OTHER OBJECTS
IN THE FIRES OF THE SENSES."
If the former method is a technique of controlling the
stimuli at the very gateway of the senses, the latter is a
different technique of controlling the same from the inner,
and therefore more subtle, level of perception, called the
mind.
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING THESE FOUR METHODS,
YET ANOTHER TECHNIQUE HAS BEEN
PROPOUNDED BY THE LORD IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:
27. Others again sacrifice all the functions of the senses and the
functions of the breath (vital energy) in the fire of the YOGA of
self-restraint, kindled by knowledge.
ALL THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SENSE-ORGANS
(JNANA-INDRIYAS), AND THE ORGANS OF ACTION
(PRANA-INDIRYAS) ARE OFFERED INTO THE
KNOWLEDGE KINDLED-FIRE OF RIGHT
UNDERSTANDING --- Control of the ego by the better
understanding of the Divine Reality is called here as the
"Yoga-of-Self-restraint' (ATMA-SAMYAMA-YOGA).
The "Path-of-Discrimination" (Vichara) lies through a
constant attempt at distinguishing between the limited lot
of the ego and the divine destinies of the Spirit. Having
discriminated thus, to live more and more as the Self, and
309
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
not as the ego, is to "RESTRAIN THE SELF BY THE SELF
(Atma-Samyama)." By this process, it is evident how the
mad ramblings of the organs of perceptions and actions
can be completely restrained and entirely conquered.
EXHAUSTING THE ABOVE-MENTIONED FIVE
DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES, AS THOUGH TO BRING TO
THE UNDERSTANDING OF ARJUNA, THAT A
HUNDRED OTHER METHODS CAN BE INDICATED,
KRISHNA ENUMERATES IN HASTE FIVE MORE
DIFFERENT METHODS IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
28. Others again offer wealth, austerity and YOGA as sacrifice,
while the ascetics of self-restraint and rigid vows offer study of
scriptures and knowledge as sacrifice.
OFFERING OF WEALTH (Dravya-Yajna) --- Sacrifice of
wealth is to be understood in its largest connotation.
Charity and distribution of honestly acquired wealth, in a
sincere spirit of devotion to and in the service of the
community, or of the individual who is the recipient of the
benevolence, is called Dravya-Yajna. This includes more
than a mere offering of money or food.
The term Dravya includes everything that we possess, not
only in the world outside but also in our worlds of
emotions and ideas. To pursue thus a life of charity,
serving the world as best as we can, with all that we
possess physically, mentally and intellectually is the noble
sacrifice called "Wealth sacrifice."
310
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In order to perform this it is not at all necessary that the
devotee should be materially rich. Even if we are poor and
physically DEBILITATED, from our bed of pain and
penury, we can still be charitable, because our inner
treasurers of love, kindness, sympathy and affection, do
not at all depend either upon our material circumstances
nor on our physical condition. Sometimes, a word of
sincere sympathy, a look of love, a smile of true affection,
or a word registering true friendship, can give to the
receiver more than a heartless cheque, even if it be for a
very fat sum.
Tapo-yajna --- Some live, offering unto their Lord, a life of
austerity. There is no religion in the world which does not
prescribe, by some method or the other, periods of austere
living. These austerities (Vratas) are invariably undertaken
in the name of the Lord. It is very well-known that the
Lord of Compassion, who feeds and sustains even the
lowliest of the low, can gain no special joy because of a
devotee's self-denial. But it is generally done in a spirit of
dedication, so that the seeker might achieve some self-
control. This activity, in some extreme cases very painful
indeed, is undertaken in order that the devotee may learn
to control himself in his sense-life.
Yoga-yajna --- An earnest attempt of the lesser in us to
grow into a better standard of diviner living, is called
Yoga. In this attempt, devoted worship of the Lord-of-the-
heart, called Upasana, is a primary method. This worship
and love, offered to the Lord-of-the-heart, when
311
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
performed without any desire or motive, is also called
Yoga, since it directly hastens the seeker's self-
development.
Swadhyaya-yajna --- The daily deep study of the scriptures
is called Swadhyaya. Without a complete study of the
scriptures we will not be in a position to know the logic of
what we are doing in the name of spiritual practice, and
without this knowledge our practices cannot gain the edge
and the depth that are essential for sure progress. Thus, in
all religions, the daily study of the scriptures is insisted
upon, as an essential training during the seeker's early
days. Even after Self-realisation, we find that the Sages
spend all their spare-time reading and contemplating
upon the inexhaustible wealth of details and suggestions
in the scriptures.
In its subjective implications, Swadhyaya means "self-study
including the art of introspection pursued for
understanding our own inner weaknesses." If, in the case
of a seeker, it is a technique of estimating his own spiritual
progress, in the case of a Seer, it will be for revelling in his
own Self.
Jnana-yajna --- The Sacrifice-of-Knowledge: this word has
very often been used in the Geeta and it constitutes one of
the many original terms coined out by Vyasa to beautify
the Lord's declarations. The "Sacrifice-of-Knowledge" is
the term given to that activity in man by which he
renounces all his ignorance into the fire-of-knowledge
312
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
kindled BY him, IN him. This is constituted of two
aspects; negation of the false, and assertion of the Real
Nature of the Self. These two activities are effectively
undertaken during the seeker's meditation.
All these five methods of Self-development --- " sacrifice-
of-wealth," "austerity," "Yoga," "study" and "knowledge" ---
can be practised with profit only by those who are men of
"rigid determination" and who can find in themselves an
inexhaustible enthusiasm to apply themselves consistently
to reach this great goal. It is not sufficient that we know
these paths, or that we decide to gain these developments.
Progress in spirituality can come only to one who is
"sincere and consistent in his practices" (Yatayah).
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSE KRISHNA EXPLAINS
PRANAYAMA AS YET ANOTHER METHOD, THE
ELEVENTH IN THE SERIES:
29. Others offer as sacrifice the out-going breath in the in-
coming, and the in-coming in the out-going, restraining the
courses of the out-going and in-coming breaths, solely absorbed
in the restraint of breath.
In this verse we have a description of the technique of
'breath-control' regularly practised by some seekers, in
order to keep themselves under perfect self-control, when
they move amidst the sense-objects in the work-a-day
world.
313
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
As a sacrifice some offer "THE OUT-GOING BREATH
INTO THE IN-COMING BREATH AND OTHERS OFFER
THE IN-COMING INTO THE OUT-GOING." The latter is,
in the technique of Pranayama, called the Puraka, meaning
the 'process of filing in'; while, the former is the 'process of
blowing out,' technically called the Rechaka. These two
processes are alternated with an interval, wherein the
'breath is held for sometime,' within and without, which is
called the Kumbhaka. This process of Puraka-Kumbhaka-
Rechaka-Kumbhaka, when practised in a prescribed ratio,
becomes the technique of breath-control (Pranayama). This
technique is again explained here as a Yajna by which the
practitioner, in the long run, learns to offer all the
subsidiary Pranas into the main Prana.
Prana is not the breath; this is a general misunderstanding.
Through breath-control we come to gain a perfect mastery
over the activities of the Pranas in us. When very closely
observed, we find that the term Prana used in the Hindu
Scriptures indicates the various "manifested activities of
life in a living body." They generally enumerate five
different kinds of Pranas, which, when understood
correctly, are found to be nothing but the five different
physiological-functions in every living body.
They are: (1) the function of perception, (2) the function of
excretion, (3) the function of digestion and assimilation,
(4) the circulatory system, which distributes the food to all
parts of the body, and lastly (5) the capacity in a living-
creature to improve himself in his mental outlook and
314
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellectual life. These activities of life within, about which
an ordinary man is quite unconscious, are brought under
the perfect control of the individual through the process of
Pranayama, so that a seeker can, by this path, come to gain
a complete capacity to withdraw all his perceptions. This
is indeed a great help to a meditator.
IN THIS SERIES OF TECHNIQUES ENUMERATED BY
KRISHNA, AS A LAST METHOD, WE HAVE IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZA THE TWELFTH METHOD
DETAILED:
30. Others, with well-regulated diet, offer vital-airs in the Vital-
Air. All these are knowers of sacrifice, whose sins are destroyed
by sacrifice.
There are some who, through systematic regulation of
their diet, come to gain a complete mastery over
themselves and their appetites and passions. Dieting is not
at all a new technique in India. The ancient Rishis not only
knew the vitamin-contents and the caloric-values of the
various food materials, but also prescribed very scientific
combinations of the available vegetables and cereals to
suit the temperament, function, and duties of persons
belonging to different levels of society. Not only this; they
so well perfected their knowledge that they even showed
how, through regulated dieting, a man's character and
behaviour, and ultimately his very cultural quality, can be
purified and raised.
315
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The verse adds that all these "KNOWERS OF Yajna,"
meaning all those who know "the art of living these
techniques," when they practice them in a spirit of self-
dedication and selfless enthusiasm, can fully come to
profit by them. These methods and techniques do not
promise that they will, of themselves, guide us or lead us
to the Supreme. It is promised that all those who practise
all, or a few, or even one of them for a sufficiently long
period, can become "PURIFIED OF THEIR SINS."
Sin, we have already discussed, is but a wrong pattern of
thought-channels that is etched in a mind by
devolutionary thoughts, entertained by a deluded ego in
its extreme misunderstanding and its consequent
attachment with the body and sense-objects. It is these
sinful vasanas that make the ego act like an animal and
force it to commit low and vicious criminalities. The
above-mentioned practices not only wipe clean the
existing wrong-vasanas but cut out in their place new-
channels-of-thoughts, more constructive and evolutionary
in their very nature.
Thus, it must be carefully noted that all practices, physical,
mental, or intellectual, that are generally known as divine
and religious, are, without exception, only techniques by
which the mind-and-intellect equipment gets adjusted for
greater and more effective self-application in meditation.
Meditation is the "path" in which the ego learns to
withdraw its false evaluations of itself in particular, and of
life in general, and comes to the final experience of its own
316
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
divine nature. We often find sincere seekers getting so
extremely attached to their own "path" of practice that
they constantly argue about it among themselves.
Therefore, Arjuna has been instructed here that all "paths,"
however noble and great they may be, are all but means,
and not an end in themselves.
IN ALL THE ABOVE-ENUMERATED TWELVE
DIFFERENT "YAJNA-TECHNIQUES," SELF-EFFORT IS A
COMMON FACTOR, AND THEREFORE, THE LORD
SAYS:
31. The eaters of the nectar --- remnant of the sacrifice --- go to
the Eternal BRAHMAN. Even this world is not for the non-
performer of sacrifice; how then the other (world) , O best of the
Kurus?
EATING THE SACRED REMNANT OF THE Yajna --- In
the ancient ritualism of fire-sacrifices, things that were 'left
over' in the pot from which the offerings were made, were
called the "sacred remains," and they were considered by
the devotees as divinely potent-remnants from the Lord's
own plates. This was generally eaten by the devotees with
great reverence, and it was considered that, thereby their
minds would get purified.
In the metaphor used here, when we try to find its
corresponding implication in the subjective world, we
must understand "the remnant that is left over" to mean
"the result of the above-mentioned twelve types of Yajnas."
317
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The result of any one of the above 'Yajnas' is, as we know,
a greater amount of self-control and the consequent inner
integration of the individual personality. Those who have
gained this have prepared themselves for the greatest
vocation in life called 'intense meditation.'
Such an integrated man can gain a greater inner poise in
his meditation through which he can easily come to
experience the Infinite and the Eternal, indicated by the
term Brahman. The second line of the verse contains a
beautiful generalisation which clinches the main idea, that
self-development and inner growth cannot be had without
investing continuous and sincere self-effort. Inaction can
never bring about any profit even in this world, in any
field whatsoever. Without self-dedicated and selfless
activity, no great and enduring profit can be achieved in
this world, and therefore, Krishna exclaims: "How could a
seeker hope to achieve the Highest without any conscious
effort at gaining it?"
Two doubts can arise in the minds of ruthlessly intelligent
students. It may be doubted: "Can all these different
'paths' lead us to one and the same goal, or do they lead to
different goals?" It may also be doubted: "Are these not
mere intellectual theories propounded by Krishna himself
as an original contribution to Hindu thought?"
THE FOLLOWING EXPLAINS THESE TWO DOUBTS:
318
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
32. Thus innumerable sacrifices lie spread out before
BRAHMAN --- (literally at the mouth or face of BRAHMAN )
--- Know them all as born of action, and thus knowing, you shall
be liberated.
In the world, no two different activities produce the same
set of results. The twelve different Yajnas described so far,
are all conspicuously different from one another, and so
they must all be producing not an identical result but a
series of different effects. In order to show that though the
"paths" are different, all of them ultimately lead to the
same goal, it is said here: "Various Yajnas lie open, leading
to the gate of Brahman, the ETERNAL." Just as 'all roads
lead to Rome,' all the above-mentioned techniques of
Yajna also ultimately lead to one and the same goal.
KNOW THEM ALL TO BE BORN OF ACTION --- This
timely reminder of the Lord has more than one direct
suggestion: (a) these "paths" prescribed in the Vedas are all
to be pursued through self-effort, and therefore, Arjuna is
reminded of the inevitability of right action, if he wants to
move ahead in his cultural self-development; and (b) it
also suggests that all these "paths" are only the means and
not the end. Action is born of "desires," and, therefore, as
long as there is action there is no redemption from
"desires." The "State-of-Desirelessness" is the "State-of-
Perfection," and therefore, in the context of our
understanding, these pregnant words of the verse ring a
note of warning that we should not misunderstand these
Yajnas as the very goal of life.
319
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
UNDERSTANDING THUS, YOU SHALL BE FREE ---
Here the word "understanding" is not a mere intellectual
apprehension but a complete spiritual comprehension, in
a vivid subjective experience of Reality.
Right-Knowledge was represented as a "Knowledge-
sacrifice" (IV-24). Then, several sacrifices have been
mentioned. Knowledge is now being extolled, as
compared with these latter kinds of sacrifices, which are
all means of attaining the Purushartha --- the inner
integration.
33. Superior is "knowledge-sacrifice" to "Sacrifice-with-objects,
" O Parantapa. All actions in their entirety, O Partha,
culminate in Knowledge.
Krishna compares the Dravya-Yajna --- the sacrifice of
material oblations --- with Jnana-Yajna, and declares that,
for cultural self-development, Jnana-Yajna is any day
nobler and diviner than mere formalistic ritualism with
material offerings (Dravya-Yajna).
In the second line of the verse the Lord explains how and
why He considers "the sacrifice of 'ignorance'in
Knowledge" (Jnana-Yajna) as greater and nobler than "the
sacrifice of food and other materials in the sacred fire"
(Dravya-Yajna). Ritualistic Karmas produce results to enjoy
which the individual ego has to take up new
manifestations, wherein again, he has yet to undertake
and perform more and more activities. Karma never ends
320
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Karma, and therefore, action cannot be a complete
fulfilment in itself.
On the other hand, Right-Knowledge (Jnana) ends all
Karmas, once and for all, inasmuch as the deluded-ego
destroys itself in the light-of-Self-Knowledge. We have
already seen that 'ignorance'causes 'desires,' and desires
are the seeds from which all actions arise. When this
'ignorance,' the primary source of all activities, ends at the
dawn of 'Knowledge,' all actions naturally get fulfilled.
Therefore, "ALL ACTION IN ITS ENTIRETY, O PARTHA,
ATTAINS ITS CONSUMMATION IN KNOWLEDGE."
IF THUS, BY 'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE WE CAN REALLY
GAIN THE FULLEST SATISFACTION, THEN HOW ARE
WE TO GAIN THIS 'KNOWLEDGE' BY WHICH ALL
ACTIONS CAN AT ONCE BE BURNT UP AND
EXHAUSTED?
34. Know that by long prostration, by question, and service, the
"wise" who have realised the Truth will instruct you in (that)
'Knowledge. '
The verse explains the qualities that are necessary in a
teacher, who alone can instruct us on the "Path-of-
Knowledge" and guide us to the great consummation in
all life. It also explains the mental attitude and the
intellectual approach which a successful student must
adopt, so that his contact with the Guru may be fruitful.
321
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PROSTRATING YOURSELF --- All that is meant here is
that the student must have an intellectual attitude of
surrender and meekness, respect and obedience, when he
approaches the teacher who has to instruct him upon the
secret-of-life. Regarding the world within and the
methods of its control, ordinarily, the students are
completely ignorant, and therefore, they must approach
the teacher with a readiness to understand, grasp and
follow his instructions.
Just as water flows always from a higher to a lower level,
so too, 'knowledge' can flow only to a lower level. It is,
therefore, necessary that the student must have a "spirit of
prostration" in him so that he may be able to get himself
surcharged with the 'Knowledge' that flows from the
teacher. Thus the prostration, as used here, essentially
defines more, the required mental and intellectual attitude
of the student, than his physical readiness to fall-flat on
the ground at the feet of his Master.
BY QUESTIONS --- By raising doubts to the teacher we
are opening up the cistern of 'Knowledge' locked up in the
Master's bosom. A perfect Guru immediately detects from
the questions, the false line of thinking in the student, and
while removing the very doubt, he imperceptibly orders
and reorganises the right-way of thinking in the inner
thought-life of the student. When this intellectual
wrestling has been practised for a long time, the fragrance
of perfection in the teacher, as it were, gets transferred to
the student's life!
322
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Therefore, it has been an immortal tradition among the
Hindus to have open discussions between the teacher and
the taught, called Satsanga. This privilege is not available
in all religions of the world. In fact, Vedanta alone thus
dares to proclaim a perfect freedom for the intellect. It
never trades upon the blind faith of the seekers. In all
other religions, faith is a great power and force, and
therefore, many of the intellectual imperfections in their
Scriptures cannot be completely answered; and the priests
therein must necessarily check the full freedom of the
seekers to question their sacred texts.
BY SERVICE --- The offering of flowers and sweetmeats is
not what constitutes seva. These have been understood as
the service of the teacher only as a by-product of
institutionalism and Ashrama organisation. A true service
of the teacher lies in the attempt of the student to attune
himself to the principles of life advocated and advised to
him by the Master. To live the life indicated by the Rishis
is the greatest seva that an imperfect mortal can offer to the
Man-of-Perfection.
The two main qualifications essential for a fully useful
teacher on the spiritual path are: (a) a perfect knowledge
of scriptural literature and (b) a complete subjective
experience of the Infinite Reality. These two factors are
indicated here. Each, without the other, is totally useless
in guiding a seeker. Mere knowledge of the Scriptures can
make only a learned Pandita and not a Perfect-Master. A
man of intimate experience of Truth will, in himself,
323
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
become completely silent, because he will find it
impossible to explain and express his own transcendental
experience to other seekers.
BY THIS THE LORD MEANS TO SAY THAT, THAT
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE, WHICH IS IMPARTED BY
THOSE WHO HAVE REALISED THE TRUTH --- THAT
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE AND NO OTHER
'KNOWLEDGE' --- CAN PROVE EFFECTIVE. THEN THE
FOLLOWING STATEMENT HOLDS GOOD:
35. Knowing that, you shall not, O Pandava, again get deluded
like this; and by that, you shall see all beings in your Self, and
also in Me.
After all these painful troubles, it may chance that we may
get 'Knowledge,' but after one's death one may again fall
back to 'ignorance'and come to repeat the same process.
Even in our own life-time there have been many things
learnt and experienced which we do not now remember.
Similarly, this 'Knowledge' also may be lost to us in which
case it will be indeed a great loss.
This doubt is fully cleared here by an assertive, confident
declaration that after regaining this 'Knowledge,' "YOU
SHALL NOT, O PANDAVA, AGAIN GET DELUDED
LIKE THIS." This declaration, rather fanatical in style, has
to be, for the time being, accepted by all seekers. All
teachers unanimously declare this idea and since they
have no particular reason to deceive their generation, it is
324
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
but intelligent that we should accept the truth of this
declaration in good faith --- till we come to confirm it in
our own personal experience.
No doubt, an immature child can never understand the
physical thrills of the nuptial chamber, and thereby it
cannot be said that the newly-weds are always telling
lies!! The little child has not matured enough even to feel
sympathetically the thrills explained. Similarly, we, living
in delusion, cannot UNDERSTAND the thrills of the
transcendental, or EXPERIENCE its Eternal Nature ---
however vividly the teachers may explain, until we also
grow to the required inner maturity.
By this rediscovery of the Self, Krishna promises that the
Pandava Prince will thereafter be able to recognise the
entire creation --- constituted of the world of objects,
emotions, and ideas --- as nothing other than the Self,
which is his own real Nature; which again is nothing other
than 'Me', Lord Krishna, the Paramatman. Having for once
realised the ocean, all the waves are recognised by the
intelligent-eye as nothing but the ocean.
In this stanza, thus, tests of having realised "that
Knowledge" --- discussed in the previous stanzas, are
given. It also indicates how long we must hold on to the
apron of a true Guru. As long as we have not realised that
the whole creation is nothing but our own Self, which is as
divine and omnipotent as the Lord of Dwarka Himself, so
long we cannot afford to leave our intimate relationship
325
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and complete dependence upon the Preceptor and Guide,
the Guru.
MOREOVER, SEE HOW EXCELLENT 'KNOWLEDGE' IS:
36. Even if you are the most sinful of all sinners, yet you shall
verily cross all sins by the raft of 'Knowledge. '
While Arjuna was promised such a glorious
transcendental experience, too divine for him to believe,
he felt a certain amount of lack of confidence in himself,
which was, perhaps, reflected, on his face. He had a
feeling that he was not fit for such a great inner
experience. Such a feeling can come to anyone of us,
because there is none among the intelligent who is not
painfully conscious of his own shortcomings.
Vedanta is not a philosophy that heartlessly keeps the
sinners out of its halls of wisdom. It does not believe that
there is any lost soul who will ever wander among the
heathens, and who can ONLY be redeemed IF he enters
the portals of the Church of Vedanta!! Tolerant to a fault,
Vedanta declares the Truth and nothing but the Truth. The
All-pervading Divine manifests everywhere and therefore,
there is no sinner who cannot, through his endeavour,
come to claim his own heritage of Absolute Perfection.
The Geeta is a scripture of life written for man, and its
universality is unmistakably seen in the statement here. It
assures man that "EVEN IF HE BE THE MOST SINFUL
326
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
AMONG THE SINFUL," he too can cross over his painful
destinies of the present and reach the shores that lie
beyond finitude and imperfections. Such a clear charter of
man's right to the Divine has never so far been written in
any other existing scripture of the world!!
To rediscover that, in reality, the ego is nothing other than
the Self in us, and to live thereafter as the Self of all, is
called true 'Wisdom' (Jnana). Having thus awakened to
our Real Nature, the dreamy cravings of the flesh can no
more enchant us away from our pristine glory and make
us run down the channels of sensuousness, to wreck
ourselves on the stony bed of sin and sorrow. This is
indicated by a beautiful metaphor: "BY THE RAFT OF
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE SHALL YOU GO ACROSS ALL
SINS."
IN WHAT MANNER DOES THIS WISDOM DESTROY
SIN?... HERE IS AN EXAMPLE:
37. As the blazing fire reduces fuel to ashes, O Arjuna, so does
the Fire-of-Knowledge reduce all actions to ashes.
JUST AS FIRE REDUCES FUEL TO ASHES --- This
example has been given by the Lord in His sheer fatherly
love for Arjuna. These words, familiar in all Yajnashalas,
when used apart from their word meaning, are capable of
creating, in their association, brilliant suggestions of a
serene atmosphere and a thrilled sense of divinity.
327
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Besides, the example is very striking. Whatever be the
quality, shape, condition, colour, etc., of the fuel pieces,
when all of them are taken to the fire-place and digested
by the fire, they become one homogeneous mass of ash! In
the samples of ash left in the hearth we cannot recognise
the ash of a particular twig as different from that of
another. Similarly, all Karmas, it is said, good, bad, or
indifferent, get burnt up in the 'Fire of Knowledge' and
will become something altogether different from what
they were in their cause-and-effect condition. Solid fuel
having girth, weight, smell, etc., becomes almost
weightless, with no specific colour except a light-greyness,
when it comes to the final state of ash.
Actions leave reactions. The reactions mature at different
periods of time depending upon the quality and intensity
of the actions. From beginningless time, in our different
manifestations, we have been, at every moment, acting in
our ego-centric vanity and individuality. All those actions
must have left their residual impressions and they have to
be lived through.
This entire Karma has been scientifically considered as
falling under three classifications. They are called "not yet
operative" (Sanchita), "operative" (Prarabdha), and "to be
operative in future" (Agami). When, in the Geeta, it is said
that all Karmas are burnt down, the Lord means the entire
Sanchita and Agami.
328
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHEREFORE:
38. Certainly, there is no purifier in this world like 'Knowledge.
' He who is himself perfected in YOGA finds it in the Self in
time.
So glorious is the result of Self-realisation that Lord
Krishna explodes in enthusiasm and cries: "VERILY
THERE EXISTS NOTHING IN THIS WORLD MORE
NOBLE AND SACRED THAN SELF-KNOWLEDGE." Just
as to a drowning man there is nothing more precious than
a life-belt, so too, to the deluded ego there cannot be a
greater possession and a nobler endeavour than the
acquisition of 'Knowledge' of its own Real Nature.
The Knowledge of the Self can be attained in one's own
bosom when one has gained in oneself a full "MASTERY
IN Yoga" --- when one has sincerely and diligently
practised the above-mentioned twelve Yajnas and gained a
complete self-mastery through them. This mastery of the
Self over the flesh is not given by any teacher. The
traditional story of a teacher spiritualising a student by his
touch is a myth; it is impossible. Had it been so, in the
presence of such a perfect Prophet like Krishna, Arjuna
could have attained --- especially when the Lord felt such
a great friendliness and love towards him --- in a wink, all
the spirituality needed to become a God-man.
Many devotees have, from time to time, wasted their
chances and brought dishonour to their noble teachers,
329
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
because they expected their Gurus to impart their acquired
Wisdom to them, their Chelas (disciples), for the physical
services rendered or the intellectual support given. Many
of the existing seekers are, today, thoughtlessly
squandering away their noble opportunities by vainly
waiting for this cheap and ready method of purchasing
God-hood! Let them be warned that, in spite of such
glorifications of some Gurus available in the market and
sold at some Ashramas in this country, it has no scriptural
support. Here, Krishna, in all love, plainly tells the truth to
Arjuna that he has to purify himself (Swayam) and then he
himself will realise the Truth "in good time" (Kalena).
No definite time schedule is promised for Perfection to
manifest. It is only said that he who is practising sincerely
and devotedly, all the twelve different subjective-Yajnas
that are described earlier, will attain the necessary growth
within, and will "IN GOOD TIME" come to experience the
Self, the Beatitude-of-Perfection, the State of God-hood.
IN GOOD TIME (Kalena) --- This does not mean either
immediately, nor does it promise us the Supreme only
after trillions of impossible years. The same idea has been
more beautifully described in the following stanza by a
more self-explanatory term "ere long" (Achirena). It gives a
direct suggestion of hope and guidance to all seekers of all
times that they need not become impatient and that, in
fact, it would be far better for them constantly to apply
themselves on the right path in the full confidence that
they shall "ere long" reach their goal.
330
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE SUREST MEANS OF ACQUIRING WISDOM IS
DECLARED AS FOLLOWS:
39. The man who is full of faith, who is devoted to It, and who
has subdued the senses, obtains (this) 'Knowledge' ; and having
obtained 'Knowledge, ' ere long he goes to the Supreme Peace.
The qualities that are necessary for an individual to be
assured of the Knowledge-Divine are being enumerated
here as vividly as from the leaf of a Science text-book.
Three great qualities have been indicated and to
understand them is to understand why the so-called
seekers, in spite of their claims to sincere self-application,
do not actually reach anywhere near the ladder of
development. Faith, devotion, and self-control are the
three imperative necessities to be acquired ere we can
hope to evolve to the diviner stature from our present
mortal encumbrances. But these three words are more
often misunderstood than rightly evaluated.
FAITH (Shraddha) --- Exploiters of religions have been
making capital out of repeating this word as their safest
excuse for all problems spiritual, to clear which devotees
may approach these men who pose themselves as guides
in religion. Invariably, we find that the ordinary devotees
are completely rendered, sometimes fanatical and often
poorer, in their intellectual and mental growth, because of
the unintelligent insistence of Shraddha translated as "blind
331
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
faith and unquestioned acceptance of any declaration said
to be divine."
Shankara tolls the death-knell of this misunderstanding
when he explains Shraddha as "that by which an individual
readily understands the exact import of the scriptural text
as well as the pregnant words of advice of the preceptor."
DEVOTED TO IT (Tatparah) --- Whatever be the 'path' of
divine self-development that he may be following, it is an
unavoidable necessity that the seeker must give his
undivided attention to it, and must, on all occasions,
maintain in his mind a continuous consciousness of the
Divine. A mere intellectual study of the scriptures will not
help us in purifying and shaping our "within' to the
glorious Beauty of the Divine. It is necessary that we must
pour out our mind and intellect into the scheme of living
that the Upanishads advise.
WHO HAS SUBDUED THE SENSES --- The Shraddha and
Jnana explained above will not sustain themselves, and no
seeker can consistently hope to entertain them unless he is
constantly striving his best to live in a spirit of self-control.
It is the sense-organs that seduce us away into the life of
excessive sensuousness, and when one has entered into
the troubled waters of a sensuous life, one has no chances
of maintaining oneself quietly in the higher values of life.
To walk the Path-Divine is to get out of the gutters-of-
sensuousness. Excessive sense-life and Absolute God-life
are antitheses to each other; where the one is, the other
332
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
cannot be. Where the light of inward serenity and deeper
peace have come, the darkness created by sense passions
and animal appetites must depart. It is imperative,
therefore, that a seeker should learn to live in steady and
constant sense-control.
Why should we live renouncing sense enjoyments, and
employing our mind in remembering constantly the
Divine goal of life, with faith both in ourselves and in the
science of religion? Ordinarily, an intellect can enquire
only as to the cause-and-effect of things. The ego is ever
employed in its own motive-hunting. A seeker in the
initial stages of his self-development remains constantly in
his intellect. Naturally, he will enquire what the result of
such a conspicuous sacrifice would be. To convince him,
the second line is given.
That a seeker who lives the above-mentioned triple-
programme of Divine life, reaches the State-of-
'Knowledge' is the promise and guarantee of the Rishis,
who are the authors of the immortal scriptures. A doubt
again arises as to why we should, after all, acquire the
'Knowledge-Divine.' Krishna explains here that, having
gained the right-knowledge, the individual "SOON
REACHES THE SUPREME PEACE." The promise of
reaching the great Goal-of-life is not guaranteed to take
effect in a definite period of time. Just as, in the previous
stanza, it was said, "In good time" (Kalena), so too, here it
is said, "Ere long" (Achirena). In short, after gaining this
'Knowledge,' one would "soon" reach the Goal-of-life.
333
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SUPREME PEACE (Param Shantim) --- The Goal-of-life is
labelled here as the "Great Peace" that knows no
diminution. In these days of peace-mongers getting ready
for war in the name of peace, one is apt to become
honestly sceptical about the goal indicated in this stanza.
The term 'peace' here is not that undefined vague concept,
that is often repeated in politics, whenever it is convenient
for a set of politicians to do so, but the term Shanti has a
wealth of psychological suggestiveness.
It is very well-known that every living creature is, at all
moments, trying to gain a better happiness, through all its
activities in life. From breathing and eating, to the
organised endeavour in capturing the world-market
through war and destruction, all activities are attempts by
the frail individuals to discover a greater and a better joy
or happiness. This is true not only in man but in the
animal kingdom, and even in the vegetable world. In
short, no action is possible unless the actor is motivated by
an inner urge in him to seek a greater sense of fulfilment
or joy unto himself.
If thus, the whole world is striving to win the highest joy
that it possibly can, and having gained it, to invest all
energy and intelligence to retain the same, then the goal of
life should be ABSOLUTE-HAPPINESS, where all strife
ends, all desires are fulfilled, all thoughts and agitations
are finally exhausted. Desires for joy give rise to thought
disturbances, which, trying to fulfil themselves in the
outer world, become the visible actions in everyday life.
334
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The restlessness of the mind and the weary fatigue of the
body shall both end, when Absolute Joy is attained.
Therefore, Absolute Joy is Absolute Peace.
Here, in this stanza the Goal-of-life is indicated as the
Supreme Peace, which may be, in other words, explained
as the Supreme Joy.
THOU SHALT NOT DOUBT THIS, FOR DOUBT IS
MOST SINFUL. HOW?... LISTEN:
40. The ignorant, the faithless, the doubting-self goes to
destruction; there is neither this world, nor the other, nor
happiness for the doubter.
In the previous verse it was said that those who had faith
and knowledge would soon reach the Supreme Peace. In
order to hammer this very same Truth in, Krishna is here
emphasising through a negative declaration that they,
who have NOT these qualities cultivated, gained and
developed in them, will get themselves ultimately
destroyed and completely ruined. He who has neither the
"Knowledge-of-the-Self" --- if not a spiritual realisation, at
least a clear intellectual understanding --- nor "the
intellectual readiness to grapple with and fully
understand the true import of the scriptural declarations
and the words of the Masters" (Shraddha), Krishna asserts,
335
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
will certainly get ruined, if he be also a 'doubting Thomas'
(Samshaya-atma).
In the next line, Krishna, with all emphasis, condemns
such men of endless doubts, and points out their tragedy
in life. The Lord says that such men who "DOUBT THE
SELF" will not find any joy or happiness ANYWHERE --- "
NEITHER HERE NOR IN THE HEREAFTER." In
explaining thus, the Geeta seems to express that there may
be a small chance perhaps, for one who is devoid of
knowledge and faith to discover some kind of a happiness
in this world, here and now, but that those who are
constant doubters can enjoy neither here nor there. Such
men are psychologically incapable of enjoying any
situation, because the doubting tendency in them will
poison all their experiences. He whose teeth have become
septic must constantly poison the food that he is taking; so
too, those who have this tendency of doubting everything,
will never be able to accommodate themselves to any
situation, however perfect and just it might be. The line
contains a spot of satire, almost vitriolic in its pungency,
when it is directed against the intelligent sceptic.
WHEREFORE: --- FOR THIS REASON ONLY:
41. He who has renounced actions by YOGA, whose doubts are
rent asunder by 'Knowledge, ' who is self-possessed, actions do
not bind him, O Dhananjaya.
336
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This being the penultimate verse in the chapter, it is a
beautiful summary of all the main secrets-of-life explained
at length in it. When, through the practice of Karma Yoga,
we have learnt to renounce our attachments to the fruits-
of-action, and yet to work on in perfect detachment ---
when every doubt in us regarding the Goal-of-life has
been completely removed in our own inner experiences of
the nobler and the diviner in us --- as a result of the above
two, the ego comes to rediscover itself to be nothing other
than the Atman. Then the individual ego comes to live
"POISED IN THE SELF AS THE SELF." When such an
individual works, his actions can never bind him.
It is only egoistic activities motivated by our ego-centric
desires that leave gross impressions on our inner
personality, and thus painfully bind us to reap their
reactions. With a sense of detachment and in right-
knowledge, as indicated in the above scheme, when an
individual has completely destroyed his ego-sense, his
actions cannot bind him at all. As a dreamer, I might
commit a murder in my dream, of my dream-wife, but
when I awake from my dream, I shall not be punished for
the crime that I seem to have committed in my dream. For,
the dreamer has also ended along with the dream. The
dreamer committed the murder and deserves punishment;
but in the waker, the dreamer is absent. Similarly, the ego-
centric actions can bind and throttle only the ego, but
when the ego has become Atmavantah, meaning "POISED
IN THE SELF" --- just like the dreamer when he gets
poised in the waker --- the activities of the ego can no
337
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
more bind the Self. The ego "POISED IN THE SELF," is the
experience of the Real Self; the dreamer poised in the
waker, is the waker.
THIS BEING THE WONDROUS RESULT AND THE
SUPREME PROFIT THAT 'TRUE-KNOWLEDGE' CAN
GIVE TO THE DELUDED, KRISHNA ADVISES ARJUNA:
42. Therefore with the sword-of-Knowledge, cut asunder the
doubt-of-the-Self, born of 'ignorance, ' residing in your heart,
and take refuge in "YOGA. " Arise, O Bharata.
In this concluding stanza the Lord's advice is precise and
it is given with a loving insistence. The stanza rings with a
spirit of paternal urgency felt by the Lord towards the
Pandava Prince.
In the language of war, Krishna advises his warrior-friend
on the battle-field, how best to live the life of dedication
and perfection as advised by the Hindu Rishis from the
quiet and peaceful Himalayan valleys. With the "SWORD-
OF-KNOWLEDGE," Arjuna is encouraged to cut off the
bonds of ignorance and 'CLEAVE ASUNDER THIS
DOUBT-OF-THE-SELF LYING IN THE HEART."
The spiritual doubt is explained here as working from the
heart. This may read rather strange to a modern man:
doubt must come from the intellect; it cannot come from
the heart.
338
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is the traditional belief in Vedanta that "the intellect is
seated in the heart," wherein the term HEART does not
mean the fleshy pumping-instrument in the human
bosom. The term HEART is used here not in its
physiological meaning but in its literacy usage, where
HEART means "the source of all love and sympathy --- of
all noble human emotions." An intellect functioning from
and through an atmosphere of sympathetic love, kindly
charity and such other noble qualities alone can be
considered in the science of philosophy as the human
reason. Therefore, when the Upanishads talk of the doubts
lying crystallised in the heart, the Rishis mean the
intellectual perversions in some of the seekers that make
them incompetent to feel and appreciate the Vision-of-the-
Soul.
These doubts can be completely annihilated only when
the individual gains an intimate, subjective experience of
the Self in him.
This can be achieved only by Yoga --- NOT a strange
mystical process, secretly advised to a few, by
mysteriously rare groups of Gurus, to be practised in the
unknown dark caves of the Himalayas, living altogether a
frightful life of unnatural privations. In the Geeta, the
word Yoga has been forever tamed and domesticated to be
with all of us, serving us faithfully at all times in our life.
By the term Yoga, in this last stanza, Krishna means the
"twelve techniques" which he has explained as the
subjective-Yajnas.
339
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The chapter concludes with a spirited call to Arjuna:
"ARISE, O BHARATA." In the context of the Geeta,
though the word may be rightly said to mean only a call to
Arjuna, it is a call to every seeker --- especially to this
country as a whole --- to get up and act well in the spirit of
Yajna, and thereby to gain more and more inner purity, so
that
through true meditation everyone of us can come to
experience and gain the Supreme Peace which is the final
fulfilment of evolution.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the fourth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF RENUNCIATION OF
ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE
Om Om Om Om Om
Chapter 5
Karma Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action
340
