Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 11
Vishwa Roopa Darshana Yoga
THE Yoga of the Vision of the Universal Form
Arjuna Said: 1. By this word of the highest secret concerning
the Self, which You have spoken out of compassion towards me,
my delusion is gone.
In this opening stanza, Arjuna expresses his complete
satisfaction at the details regarding the glories of the Lord
which were described in the previous chapter, Arjuna
appreciated that so much labour was spent by Krishna
only to bless his disciple and bring him out of delusion. To
realise the unity in the diversity is to get an inoculation
against the sorrows of plurality. The deft pen of Vyasa
beautifully registers the effectiveness of the last chapter
upon a sincere student when he makes Arjuna confess,
"THIS, MY DELUSION, IS GONE."
REMOVAL OF A DELUSION or a misunderstanding IS
NOT IN ITSELF THE ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE
of the Real. Removal of delusion is one aspect of the
process of knowing the Truth. Arjuna must be rightly
feeling that his delusion --- his firm faith in the
separativeness of names and forms --- can no longer hold
its grounds when his intellect has been educated to look
786
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
forward to, and detect the "presence" of the Divine in the
very world of his perceptions. But at the same time, he has
not gained any visible experience of the Unity in the
diversity; he has no personal experience of the oneness of
things and beings, although theoretically at least, his
intellect has come to accept this inherent Oneness.
The Pandava Prince, Arjuna, realises that Krishna has so
elaborately explained the theme in the previous chapter
only "out of compassion towards me" (Mad-anugrahaya).
This reminds us of Krishna using almost the same term
(X-2) when He explains how He, abiding in the hearts of
his devotees, destroys all their inner darkness born out of
ignorance.
OUT OF COMPASSION FOR ARJUNA, WHAT WERE
THE SUPREMELY PROFOUND WORDS THAT WERE
GIVEN OUT BY THE LORD? LISTEN:
2. The origin and destruction of beings verily, have been heard
by me in detail from You, O Lotus-eyed Krishna, and also Your
inexhaustible greatness.
It is natural, in a discussion between the teacher and the
taught, that at the end of a difficult lesson, on approaching
the teacher with his doubts, the student should first of all
prove to him that he has sufficiently understood the
theme
787
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the discussion. This entitles the student to ask the
teacher his doubts and get them cleared. Following this
traditional method, Arjuna is trying to show Krishna that
he has completely understood the main theme of the last
chapter. He has listened to Krishna and understood the
"ORIGIN AND DISSOLUTION OF BEINGS, AND THE
GREATNESS AND THE INEXHAUSTIBLE GLORY OF
THE LORD."
And yet, a doubt remains which can be removed only
when his intellect is convinced by a confident knowledge
arising out of an actually observed demonstration. The
stanza is preparing to meet such a demand. When a
student, who has proved to have understood the logic of
discussion already carried out, asks a legitimate question,
or enquires after the remedy for a possible obstacle, a true
teacher must help him out of his troubles by all possible
means. We shall observe here in this chapter that the great
Yogeshwara (Krishna), out of sheer kindness, even
condescends to show Arjuna the form of the Cosmic-Man
because the disciple has demanded that he must see it.
THE DEMAND OF THE DISCIPLE IS DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING VERSE:
3. (Now) O Supreme Lord! As you have thus described
Yourself, I wish to see (actually) Your Form Divine, O
PURUSHOTTAMA.
788
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Indicating by a familiar idiom in Sanskrit, "So be it" (evam-
etat), Arjuna accepts the technical thesis that has been
declared by the Lord. Intellectually, it has been
satisfactorily proved that the Lord is immanent in all
names and forms. Still the intellect awaits the baptism of a
demonstration. Therefore Arjuna says, "I DESIRE TO SEE
YOUR ISHWARA-FORM." He is Ishwara who in Himself,
expresses omnipotence, infinite wisdom, strength, virtue
and splendour; these are the six qualities that are
described in our shastras as forming the characteristic
features of the God-principle.
This was the occasion on which Krishna decided to show
to Arjuna that the LORD IS NOT ONLY IMMANENT in
all forms, but He is also the vehicle or receptacle in which
all names and forms have their existence and play --- HE
IS ALSO TRANSCENDENT.
Though, with the enthusiasm of a fanatic believer in
intellectualism, Arjuna demands a demonstration, he
immediately realises that his audacity has, perhaps,
crossed the frontiers of decency.
HE IS TRYING TO SMOOTHEN HIS WORDS OUT IN
THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
4. If you, O Lord, think it possible for me to see It, do You
please, then, O Lord of YOGAS, show me Your Imperishable
Self-form.
789
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The demand in the previous stanza has been repeated
here, with a dignified humility and pure reverence. In our
ordinary life, in all our respectful appeals and humble
petitions we use such phrases as: "If I may be permitted to
say," "I shall be much obliged if," "I have the honour to
submit," "If I may have the leave to say so," etc. The
Pandava Prince, as a result of a second thought, as it were,
smoothens his solider-like abrupt language used in the
previous stanza and says that the Lord's IMMUTABLE
Universal Form may be shown to him --- "IF YOU THINK
I AM CAPABLE OF SEEING IT."
The modesty and reverence shown here are not
expressions of a faked emotion for cheap fulfilment of
desires. This is evident from the term he is using in
addressing the Lord in the verse. In the first line we find
Krishna being addressed as "O Lord" (Prabho), and in the
following line He is again addressed as "the Lord of Yogas"
(Yogeshwara). These clearly indicate that Arjuna has come
to feel that Krishna is not a mere mortal teacher, capable
of giving only some intellectual ventilations and spiritual
discourses, but that "He is Himself Divine and a Master-
of-Yoga," and therefore, he is capable of fulfilling the
request, if the "teacher" in Krishna is satisfied that the
"student" in Arjuna will be benefited by such a
demonstration.
THE HUMBLE REQUEST OF AN EARNEST STUDENT
NEVER FALLS ON DEAF EARS, IF IT IS MADE TO A
TRUE TEACHER:
790
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 5. Behold, O Partha, forms of Me, by
hundreds and thousands, of different sorts Divine, of various
colours and shapes.
If gold is the essential stuff in all the ornaments, every
ornament in the world must be available in the total gold.
To see the gold in the ornaments is relatively easy, it being
a PHYSICAL PERCEPTION. But to detect the presence of
all ornaments of different shapes and colours in the total
gold is comparatively difficult, inasmuch as it is the
VISION OF THE INTELLECT.
Keeping this idea in mind, when you read the opening
lines of the Lord's words, it becomes strikingly significant.
"BEHOLD, BY HUNDREDS AND THOUSANDS, MY
DIFFERENT FORMS CELESTIAL, VARIED IN COLOURS
AND SHAPES." It was not necessary for Krishna to
change His form to that of the Cosmic-Man; all that
Arjuna had to do was to BEHOLD THE FORM right in
front of him. But, unfortunately, the instrument-of-
perception was not tuned up for the object of his
investigation, and therefore, Arjuna could not perceive
that which was already in Krishna.
That which is lying beyond the focal length of a telescope,
cannot be viewed by the observer even though the object
may be present in line with the axis of the instrument. In
order to bring the farther object within the span of vision,
the observer will have to make the required adjustments
791
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in the telescope. Similarly, Krishna did not TRANSFORM
Himself into His Cosmic-Form, but He only helped
Arjuna to make the necessary inward adjustments so that
he could perceive what was there evidently in Krishna.
Naturally, the Lord says, "BEHOLD." The total world of
perceivable beings of all shapes and colours is indicated in
the enumeration made by the Lord in the stanza.
WHAT ARE THOSE?
6. Behold the ADITYAS, the VASUS, the RUDRAS, the (two)
ASHWINS and also the MARUTS; behold many wonders
never seen before, O Bharata.
In enumerating the items that are to be seen in Krishna's
Cosmic-Form, the Lord hints at the most important and
striking of them. This is generally done when we try to
describe a crowd of people or things by using a short
representative term. Mention is made on all such
occasions of the most important items or personalities ---
the few who represent the whole crowd.
With a note of despair ringing through his words, the
Lord concludes "BEHOLD MANY MORE SUCH
WONDERS AS NEVER SEEN BEFORE." The various
items enumerated have all been already explained in the
previous chapter* Of them the only new term used here is
the Ashwini Kumaras, the Horsemen-Twins. It is not very
clear in literature as to what exactly is the identity of these
792
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
twins with heads of horses. It is not very easy to decide
what they represent. In some places they are described as
the Dawn and the Dusk, and in other places there are
sufficient evidences to make us suspect that they represent
the Morning-Star and the Evening-Star. Anyway, they are
Angels that go to serve their devotees in times of utter
need and despair.
BY GIVING A COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF THE
THINGS TO BE EXPECTED IN THE COSMIC-VISION,
KRISHNA HAS INCREASED THE INTELLECTUAL
CURIOSITY OF HIS DISCIPLE. WHERE EXACTLY IS HE
TO LOOK FOR THESE THINGS? ... LISTEN:
7. Now behold, O Gudakesha, in this Body, that the whole
universe centres in One --- including, the moving and the
unmoving --- and whatever else you desire to see.
The enthusiastic seeker's adventurous mind having been
sufficiently educated so far to develop an unending
wealth of 'eagerness to know,' Krishna further educates,
sharpening in the student, the 'anxiety to know' in this
mind, with sufficient details on what he may expect in the
Divine Vision that is to follow. This secret technique then
makes the student ardently converge all this attention
towards one given Form Divine. This is achieved by his
verse. If we follow the technique, developed through the
expressed words, we shall find that Vyasa has here
793
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
explained the entire Science of Love as adumbrated in the
Cult of Bhakti, or 'Devotion to the Supreme.'
The entire Universe, constituted both of the moving and
the unmoving --- of the sentient and the insentient --- is
being shown by Krishna on his own physical structure as
described by the effective intimate term, "Here,
concentrated" (Iha-ekastham). And this term has been
annotated in the same stanza as "In this, My Body" (mama
dehe). The entire Universe of gross forms, both movable
and immovable, is to be compressed within the
framework of Krishna's girth and height. As we explained
earlier* the concept of space has not been completely
sponged out of Arjuna's mind but a total space-concept
equivalent to Krishna's own mortal dimensions is left in
him. With this mind, when Arjuna looks out, he must
necessarily see framed in Krishna all at once, the entire
Universe compressed and miniatured with all its multiple
details intact.
Even though "the entire Universe, including both the
moving and the unmoving" is a term sufficiently elastic so
as not to leave anything outside its implications, Krishna
again sharpens the enthusiasm of Arjuna by stating that
the Pandava could see anything "ELSE THAT YOU
DESIRE TO SEE." As a typical mortal, Arjuna is
preoccupied with the particular problem of life and his
anxiety naturally grows to peep into the future and
discover its solution rather than to realise the underlying
794
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
oneness that embraces even the forms in the outer world-
of-matter.
"THE ONE IN THE MANY" HAS BEEN DESCRIBED IN
THE LAST CHAPTER, AND HERE WE ARE ABOUT TO
SEE "THE MANY IN THE ONE."
8. But You are not able to behold Me with these Your own eyes;
I give You the divine-eye; behold My lordly YOGA.
We have already explained how it is relatively easy to see
the essential stuff as the core of individual names and
forms, but the reverse of it --- to discover the many in the
one --- is the work of a subtle intellect functioning through
right philosophical understanding. TO READ a poem,
only a knowledge of the alphabet is necessary; but to
understand its subtler beauties and to classify it in a
comparative study with other similar poems, it needs a
masterly mind that has been well soaked with the master-
pieces in poetry. Similarly, to see "THE ONE IN THE
MANY" is the work of a 'heart' soaked with faith; but to
PERCEIVE "THE MANY IN THE ONE," we need, besides
the 'heart,' an educated 'intellect' that has learnt to see for
itself the logic of the philosophers. This peculiar capacity
of an educated intellect to see the extraordinary is the
vision of the intellect which is gained when we develop
the faculty to perceive and to know.
795
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This obvious fact is explained by the Lord in this stanza,
"YOU CANNOT SEE ME WITH THESE EYES OF YOURS;
I GIVE THEE THE VISION DIVINE." There are very many
critics who try to explain this "Divine-eye" through
fantastic suppositions and ridiculous theories. Such
commentators are certainly men, not much educated in
the style of the Hindu scriptures, the Upanishads.
Expressly and tacitly, all through the Upanishads, it is
repeatedly explained that the subtler cannot be brought
within the scope and compass of the instruments-of-
perception given to man. The external sense organs can
play freely only in the outer world-of-objects. Even when
we ordinarily "see an idea" it is not done with our outer
pair of eyes. The intellectual comprehension is meant here
by the term "seeing" and the capacity of the intellect to
comprehend is the 'Divine-eye.'
This "special-vision" is given to the Pandava Prince so that
he may see "MY SUPREME YOGA-POWER" by which the
whole Universe of multiplicity is being supported by the
Lord's own form. Earlier, this particular Yoga-Power of the
Lord, has been already described at two different places,
(VII-12 and IX-4) almost in identical terms.
THE SCENE SHIFTS TO HASTINAPURA, IN THE
PALACE OF DHRITARASHTRA:
796
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Sanjaya said: 9. Having thus spoken, O King, the great Lord of
YOGA, Hari, showed to Partha His Supreme Form, as the Lord
(of the Universe).
The versatile genius of Vyasa has never left anything that
he has touched without raising it to the most sublime
heights of perfection. With unimaginable capacities for
composing incomparable poetry, unique prose-diction,
chaste descriptions, artistic, literary designs, original
innovations both in thought and form --- a brilliant
philosopher, a man of consummate wisdom, a genius in
worldly knowledge, at one time in the palace, at another
time in the battle-field, at still another time in Badrinath,
and again, among the silent snow peaks --- strode the
colossus, Sri Vyasa, as an embodiment of what is best in
the Hindu tradition and in the Aryan culture. Such an all-
round genius has not yet been reported ever to have been
born, lived or achieved so much in the history of this
globe, at any other time!
After Lord Krishna gave Arjuna a hint as to what he
should expect and where he would gain the vision of the
Cosmic-Man, etc., Vyasa introduces a small section in
which Sanjaya reports to Dhritarashtra, the blind father of
the wicked Kauravas.
The literary purpose served by this stanza is only to show
to the readers that Krishna, according to his promise, had
actually revealed his Cosmic-Form to Arjuna. But along
with that, the deft mastery of the ancient writer of
797
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Mahabharata tries to paint for us the mental attitude and
the inward sympathies of Sanjaya. We have stated earlier
that Sanjaya is "OUR OWN SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT." His sympathies are clearly with the
Pandavas, the friends of the Lord. This tendency in
Sanjaya is unquestionably revealed when he addressed his
own master merely as "O King" (Rajan) while he uses the
terms, (a) Mahayogeshwara ... "the Great Lord of Yoga" and
(b) Harih ... "the one who maintains the champions of
Truth by destroying the powers of falsehood," to indicate
Lord Krishna. The implied suggestions of these words
point at a bloodless murder of the blind old King!
With Sanjaya's words, the crowd of listeners and students
of Geeta are shifted from the field of the battle to the
palace of the battle-monger. This is perhaps necessary to
remind the readers that the philosophy of the Geeta has an
intimate practical application to life. Sanjaya informs
Dhritarashtra that the Great Lord of Yoga showed to
Arjuna his Supreme Ishwara-form. Sanjaya entertains a
thin hope that, at least on hearing that the Lord of the
Universe is on the side of his nephews, the blind King will
foresee the sure defeat of his sons and, in his
discrimination, will cry a halt to the impending disastrous
war.
IN A ROUGH OUTLINE SANJAYA DESCRIBES THE
LIST OF THINGS THAT WERE VISIBLE WITHIN THE
FRAMEWORK OF THE DIVINE CHARIOTEER:
798
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
10. With numerous mouths and eyes, with numerous wonderful
sights, with numerous divine ornaments, with numerous divine
weapons uplifted (such a form He showed).
11. Wearing divine garlands (necklaces) and apparel, anointed
with divine unguents, the All-wonderful, Resplendent, Endless,
facing all sides.
When a painter at his easel tries to express his artistic
ideas through the medium of colour he invariably begins
by outlining his theme roughly on the canvas. Later on,
inch by inch, he adds more and more details to make the
canvas sing the song of his message. Similarly in the
word-picture of the literary artist, Vyasa, this stanza
containing Sanjaya's words, represents the rough outline
of the Universal Form of the Lord.
The Vision appearing before Sanjaya is no vision for a
mortal intellect to live comfortably by. An ordinary man
must feel dazed with wonderment and fear at this august
and mighty Vision. The total Cosmos is no easy subject-
matter for the mind to conceive of or for the intellect to
comprehend, and therefore, when it comes as it does in
the Geeta, in the stark realism of the Vision, Sanjaya
stammers these phrases.
"DIVINE HIS GARLANDS AND ROBES" --- "DIVINE
THE PERFUME OF HIS ANOINTMENT" --- "ALL
MARVELLOUS, THE LORD, BOUNDLESS AND
799
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FACING EVERY SIDE" --- these represent the remaining
strokes which, when added to the previous set of lines,
bring out the picture of the Cosmic-Man roughly in its full
outline.
CONTINUING IN HIS LANGUAGE OF DOTS AND
DASHES, SANJAYA DESCRIBES:
12. If the splendour of a thousand Suns was to blaze all at once
(simultaneously) in the sky, that would be like the splendour of
that Mighty Being (great soul).
After giving this hasty sketch of the Total-Form to the
blind King, Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya explains to him the
glory of the Mighty One. The Lord, in His Universal-
aspect, was dazzling in His own brilliance and the divine
glory of it was almost blinding; and this may be another
reason why more intimate details are not given by Sanjaya
in the previous two verses. In order to convey this idea,
Sanjaya is using this strange, but powerful, simile.
The glorious shine of that Mighty Being is almost, it is
said, as luminous as that of a thousand Suns if they were
to rise up all at once in the sky. In the Upanishadic lore
also, we have the description of the Atman almost in the
same language. But somehow or other, it must be
admitted that in the mouth of Sanjaya, especially when he
is describing the Divine-Form of Krishna, it gathers a new
glamour and glory.
800
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
BEAUTIFYING THE PICTURE WITH SOME MORE
DETAILS, SANJAYA ADDS:
13. There, in the body of the God of gods, the Pandava (Son of
Pandu) then saw the whole Universe resting in one, with all its
infinite parts.
In that Divine Form of the Lord, Arjuna perceived how
the entire world of manifold varieties had been brought
together and packed to rest at one and the same place. We
have already noticed that the concept of the Cosmic-Man
is the vision of the Universe through a mind which has
ceased to act with the concept of time or space. This vision
of "the many in one" is not so much a physical perception
as an intellectual comprehension. It is not that the
Universe has shrunk into the size of Krishna. It is quite
sufficient if Arjuna has the required sense of oneness in
the world of matter and if he looks at the Universe
through his understanding so that, intellectually, he can
come to estimate the oneness of the Universe.
To quote a parallel in modern science, we may consider
the attempt of Chemistry to classify all the existing
substances. When so many things in the world are
brought on the laboratory tables, it is found that they are
constituted of the elements, in all about one hundred and
three in number. This understanding of the elements soon
yields place when the atom-contents in them are
discovered to be nothing other than the electrons, protons
801
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and neutrons. If a scientist, who knows these three were to
look through his knowledge, at the manifold substances, it
would be very easy for him to see that all things of the
world are in the three factors, which are the contents of
each atom. If fact now there are only three elements in the
world, the triple factors in the Atom. Similarly here, when
Arjuna gained his special knowledge through the grace of
Krishna, he comes to recognise the whole Universe in the
very body of the God-principle, the Total-intellect.
ARJUNA'S PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL
REACTIONS ON SEEING THIS FORM, ARE BEING
VERY CAREFULLY NOTED AND REPORTED BY
SANJAYA:
14. Then, Dhananjaya, filled with wonder, with his hair
standing on end, bowed down his head to the God and spoke
with joined palms.
On seeing this transcendental vision, emotions of
wonderment and consequent horripilations are noticed in
Arjuna. Though Sanjaya is far away, he not only seems to
see minute physical details of each soldier upon the battle-
field but also seems to have a power to peep over the body
into the mind-and-intellect equipment of each individual.
The inner wonder-emotion in Arjuna's mind is as much
evident to Sanjaya, as was his hair standing on his body.
Arjuna, with folded palms, bending his head low, now
opens his mouth for the first time to talk. That Arjuna did
802
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
not speak so long is in itself a positive indication of the
choking emotion that he must have felt at the sight of this
sweetly unnerving Divine-Form.
WHAT WERE THE ACTUAL WORDS OF WONDER-
MENT THAT BURST OUT FROM ARJUNA? ... LISTEN:
Arjuna said: 15. I see all the gods, O God, in Your body, and
(also) hosts of various classes of beings. BRAHMA, the Lord of
Creation, seated on the Lotus, all the RISHIS and celestial
serpents.
When the Prince addressed Krishna as the Resplendent
(Deva), he is endorsing the comparison of the Lord to the
light of thousand-Suns which was used earlier by Sanjaya.
Enumerating the features recognised by him on the body
of Krishna, Arjuna says, "IN THY BODY I SEE ALL THE
DEVAS AND HOSTS OF ALL GRADES OF BEINGS."
This was already indicated by Sanjaya when he described
the Universal Form as 'WEARING NUMEROUS ROBES,'
'ADORNING ITSELF WITH DIFFERENT TYPES OF
DIVINE ORNAMENTS,' 'WEARING GARLANDS OF
CELESTIAL BEAUTY,' and bearing 'AN ARSENAL OF
WEAPONS IN ITS INNUMERABLE HANDS.'
These descriptions show that in Krishna one could
recognise not only the things of the world, but in the
Virata-form of the Lord even the Devas are represented.
The same adhidaiva-idea is very directly insisted upon by
803
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna in this stanza when he describes among the things
that he saw in Krishna, the Creator, Brahmaji
(Brahmaanam), the Annihilator, Shiva (Isham), and the
Sustainer, Vishnu (Kamal-asana-stham); along with a host
of ancient Seers!
AND CELESTIAL SERPENTS --- In poetry, it is a
technique, often very effective, employed by great poets
wherein they suddenly step down from the sublime to the
ridiculous or the grotesque, only to shock the readers and
thereby tap out of
them the degree of special attention which the theme
demands. It is indicated here that from Brahmaji in the
heavens, to the serpents in the holes of the earth, all are
represented in the Lord's Cosmic-Form. The microcosm
(Vyashti) is the macrocosm (Samashti). And this is
explained and realised by all great thinkers of the world.
But nobody has ever
before tried to express this philosophical idea in the form
of a vivid objective representation. Vyasa was the pioneer
in this art and none has yet dared to follow him in this
arduous task.
THE GRIPPING DETAILS THAT CAN UNNERVE EVEN
THE MOST COURAGEOUS ARE GIVEN OUT NOW BY
ARJUNA:
804
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
16. I see Thee of boundless form on every side, with manifold
arms, stomachs, mouths and eyes; neither the end, nor the
middle, nor also the beginning do I see; O, Lord of the Universe,
O, Cosmic-Form.
A limited human intellect is not the instrument with
which one can perceive in one sweep the Infinite majesty
of the Universal-Form. It must necessarily stand staggered
at the vastness of the concept and the significances of Its
sheer dimensions. That the Lord is the ONE dynamic
Truth behind every organ of activity and in every existent
thing is indicated here when Arjuna says "I SEE THEE OF
BOUNDLESS FORM ON EVERY SIDE, WITH
MANIFOLD ARMS, STOMACHS, MOUTHS AND EYES."
This is not to be construed as a caricature of Truth. This
warning is necessary for all hasty artists, who, inspired by
the theme, generally rush to this field of thought, to
represent this Cosmic Form with their brushes and
colours. And they all but fail miserably!
The Universal Oneness is not an object of perception; it is
only a fact to be realised or apprehended. This is endorsed
by the the very words of Arjuna that immediately follow
in the stanza, "NEITHER THE END, NOR THE
BEGINNING, NOR THE MIDDLE OF THEE DO I SEE."
The description of the Truth --- from which all names and
forms arise, in which they exist, and into which they all
merge back at the end of their temporary play --- cannot
be better done in any other way and those who, with
sympathetic understanding, get at the real import of these
805
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stanzas can appreciate their rich beauties and luxurious
warmth.
The above stanzas express the oneness that threads
through the mortal beings and finite things of the world,
making a single garland of them all!
IT MAY BE DOUBTED WHETHER THE DEIFIED
DENIZENS OF THE DIVINE HIERARCHY ARE ALSO
REPRESENTED UPON THIS WONDER-FORM. THIS IS
ANSWERED IN THE FOLLOWING:
17. I see Thee with Crown, Club, and Discus; a mass of radiance
shining everywhere, very hard to look at, all round blazing like
burning fire and Sun, and incomprehensible.
Continuing his description of the Cosmic-Form, the
Pandava Prince gives more and more details of what he
comprehends in that incomprehensible Divine
extravaganza. He sees therein the Crown, the Club, and
the Discus. These are the insignia which Lord Vishnu is
said to carry, in all mythological descriptions.
Hindu gods are represented as having certain divine
symbols, and they all have their own respective special
significances --- of Kingship and Lordliness over the
world of finite things and happenings. He alone is the
Lord who is a Master-of-circumstances and a Ruler-of-
impulses. A slave to life and its enchantments is a
806
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
weakling, on whose head a crown rests only temporarily
like the gilted-cardboard-crown of an actor playing on a
stage. No authority or effectiveness in life is possible
unless the man-in-power has self-control and self-mastery.
No man can live a happy and mighty life unless he has
conquered his passions and crowned himself with
kingship over himself. He is Vishnu and He alone then
deserves the crown!
The four-armed Vishnu carries in his hands the Conch, the
Discus, the Club, and the Lotus. This is extremely
symbolical. In India the Lotus represents "peace and joy,
auspiciousness and happiness." The Conch blows and
calls man to duty; and if there be a generation of men who
listen not to the Higher-call in themselves, restlessness,
war, pestilence, famine, storms, and chaotic social and
communal disturbances visit them --- the Club descends
to hammer the generation to shape and discipline. Even
after this punishment, if there be a generation so totally
dissipated that it cannot improve, then comes the Discus --
- the sharp-toothed wheel, ever revolving, the Whirling of
Time (Kaala-chakra) to annihilate the irredeemable
generation.
When we find these in Arjuna's description as part of the
Universal Form, it becomes evident that the same Truth is
the Substratum, not only of the lowest of low worms, but
even of the Divine Trinity. The Eternal Truth is one and
the same, everywhere, at all times; only Its manifestations
are varied, and the degree of Divinity sparkling from each
807
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
differs according to the grossness or subtlety of the
equipment through which the same Infinite Reality
expresses Itself.
AS A MASS OF RADIANCE SHINING EVERYWHERE,
ALL ROUND GLOWING LIKE THE BLAZING SUN
AND FIRE, HARD TO GAZE ON --- One of the most
expressive lines in this description, this brings home to us
the glory of Pure Awareness. This is not 'light' in the
physical sense of the term; but all the same we have to use
the word, borrowed from ordinary language, though it is
applied here with a special significance. Consciousness is
the 'Light' in which we so clearly 'SEE' our own thoughts
and emotions. It is the same light which, beaming out
through the eyes, throws 'light' upon the world and
illumines for us the FORMS AND SHAPES. The same
Consciousness, beaming out through the ears, with its
special 'light,' illumines SOUND, and so on. Naturally,
therefore, the Universal-Form of Krishna, representing in
Himself the Infinite Awareness, had to be described, in the
faltering language of Arjuna, as a mass of resplendent
light, blinding all faculties of perception, feeling and
understanding.
INCOMPREHENSIBLE (Aprameya) --- So far, though
Arjuna described, as best as he could, the Form, and the
feelings It had engendered in him, there is a streak of
despair running in these stanzas. Arjuna feels that he has
not captured the theme fully in the web of his language.
Language expresses that which is perceived, or felt, or
808
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
understood. Here is a form which Arjuna experiences. He
beholds. He feels. And he comprehends it in himself. Yet,
strangely enough, here is an experience that volatilises
and eludes all attempts at being bottled in language! He
seems to be not satisfied by the objective description
which he gave in the language of his eyes, ears, etc., and
he feels equally unhappy with the language of his
emotion, as felt by his mind.
True to himself, the wonder-struck mortal is trying to sing
the glory of what he lives, in the language of his intellect.
But even here he can only cry in despair, "OH LORD
THOU ART EVER INCOMPREHENSIBLE." Though the
universal Form is painted here by the author, in the
language of an "objective experience," he makes us
understand that the Truth is the SUBJECT and not an
object of even the intellect. The Self is the KNOWER, THE
FEELER, the PERCEIVER; It is not the perceived, the felt,
or the known.
FROM THIS VISION OF THE POWER OF YOGA, I
INFER:
18. You are the Imperishable, the Supreme Being worthy to be
known. You are the great treasure-house of this Universe. You
are the imperishable Protector of the Eternal DHARMA. In my
opinion, You are the Ancient PURUSHA.
809
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
From every experience, all intelligent men try to gather
their own conclusions, which alone, in fact, constitute true
knowledge. Arjuna had a great experience, too subtle for
words to express, or for his intellect to comprehend, in all
its entirety. But from what he saw, he tries to draw certain
conclusions. Crystallised into his understanding, the
conclusions are that the Power behind this Cosmic Form is
that which is the Imperishable Supreme Truth.
When we see all the waves playing on the surface of the
ocean, manifesting and disappearing after a temporary
existence into the very waters from which they rose, we
generally conclude that the ocean is the source of all
waves. It becomes at once the rest-house for the waves, or
the treasure-house for all the disturbances. Similarly,
Arjuna comes to the intelligent conclusion that Krishna, as
the Cosmic-Form, is the very Substratum from which the
pluralistic world of phenomena arises, exists in, and
merges into. The Universe (Vishwa) mentioned here, is not
merely the astronomers' universe of physical things, but,
in Vedanta, Vishwa is the sum-total experience of everyone,
gained through the individual instruments of perception,
feeling and understanding. The Lord is the foundation
(Nidhaanam) for the entire universe of disturbances,
experienced by us at our physical, mental and intellectual
levels.
Things that change can continue to do so only on a
changeless substratum. The world-of-change plays ever to
810
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the tune of Time and Space. But, in order that we may feel
a continuity of the happenings and thereby gain a
comprehensive experience of the total, there must be one
constant and changeless "Knowing-principle" that
registers the happenings, without itself in the least being
involved in the change. That truth is the Self, and the Self
alone is that which could take upon itself the stupendous
Universal-Form (Vishwaroopa). Keeping these ideas in
mind, Arjuna declares that He who has transformed
Himself into this Wonder-Form is the One Changeless
Truth, that permeates the entire realm of changes and
modifications.
In India, to the Hindus, the protector of his Dharma is not
a mortal king, or a priest class. The Supreme alone is its
guardian, for the Hindus are not the followers of any
accidental prophet, who has a fleeting historical reality
and a limited mission of serving his immediate generation
with the best he had. To the Hindu, THE ETERNAL
TRUTH
IS HIS GOAL, HIS MASTER AND HIS WAY. We demand
no mortal power with its poison-gas and atom-bomb to
protect our Dharma.
THAT YOU ARE THE ANCIENT PURUSHA, IS MY
OPINION --- In Vedanta, the very physical structure is
considered as a Capital-city with nine gates, each
controlled and guarded by its presiding deity. That which
dwells in the city, here meaning the body, is in Sanskrit
811
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'Purusha.' In the context of the stanza, it only means that
the solution for the riddle of life, which is the source, or
substratum of the whole universe, is to be sought, not
among the world-of-objects but within the very layers of
personalities in us, until we discover it as the Purusha, the
Eternal. The Conscious Principle, which is the Spark-of-
life in everyone, is here indicated to be the very Eternal
Truth which alone can take up the Form-Universal, as it
stands now in front of Arjuna's bewildered gaze.
MOREOVER:
19. I see You without beginning, middle, or end, infinite in
power, of endless arms, the sun and moon being Your eyes, the
burning fire Your mouth, heating the whole universe with Your
radiance.
Continuing the description of the Infinite as
comprehended by the subtle perception of Arjuna and
interpreted by his intellect in terms of the Universe of
things and names, it is explained, "I SEE THEE WITHOUT
BEGINNING, MIDDLE AND END, INFINITE IN
POWER, OF INFINITE ARMS." This pen-picture, drawn
by Vyasa with his eloquent poetry, gives a false
impression that the theme is an object, and many are the
artists who have tried to capture this form on the canvas.
The folly is clear to every intelligent student of Vedanta.
That which is Infinite, without beginning or end, cannot
be brought within the area of a limited canvas-piece. But,
812
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
at the same time, the phrase "OF INFINITE ARMS" tickles
the painter to express it through his own art. In fact, the
Universal-Form, standing out so clearly in relief work in
this transcendental apprehension of the author, can be
comprehended only by students of deep understanding
and developed intuition.
Here, by the term "OF INFINITE ARMS" it only means
that the Supreme Self, as the dynamic life, is the one
essential strength behind every hand that acts and
achieves.
The "principle of light" is the very "principle" in the eye. If
the eyes were not there, light itself would have no
meaning. At the same time, if the "principle of light" were
not blessing the objects of form, the instruments of
cognition --- the eyes --- could not have functioned at all.
We have here the description of the totality. The "principle
of vision," i.e., all the eyes in the whole universe, is
described as the pair-of-eyes, in the Universal-Form of the
Lord. Therefore, in the technical language of Vedanta, it
has been aptly described here that "THE SUN AND THE
MOON ARE YOUR EYES."
BURNING FIRE OF YOUR MOUTH --- Here fire has been
considered as the principle behind speech and the
principle governing taste. Warm food tastes better; frozen-
food has no taste. The presiding deity of speech can FIRE
the generation. HEATED discussions always take place;
cold discussion is a painful monotony. Speeches that
813
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
freeze the audience are only lullabies. And the mouth
being the seat for both the instruments of speech and taste,
the mouth of the Vishwaroopa is explained here as "Fire."
HEATING THE WHOLE UNIVERSE WITH YOUR
RADIANCE --- The Self cannot but be luminous, because
Consciousness illumines all experiences, at all times, in all
living organisms. This light of Consciousness not only
illumines, but also imparts the Warmth of life to the entire
Universe. From the very statement it is evident that the
ancient Hindu had turned his gaze inward only when he
had exhausted his observations and study of the world
outside. It seems that he knew well that at a certain degree
of temperature alone life could continue on this globe;
below the required minimum and above the maximum
temperature, life would be extinct.
The light that is emanating from Truth is Its own light,
and not something which It has derived from any other
source. It is by "Your own Radiance" (Swa-Tejasa) that the
life is sustained in the world of names and forms.
20. This space between earth and the heavens and all the
quarters is filled by You alone; having seen this, Your wonderful
and terrible form, the three worlds are trembling with fear, O
great-souled Being.
Truth, as apprehended by Arjuna, pervades the entire
world-of-objects and even the concepts of time and space
814
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are not independent of this Truth. The theme that has
been described here, we should not forget, is the Infinite,
the Eternal. Naturally, it is said here, "BY YOU ALONE,
THE SPACE BETWEEN HEAVEN AND EARTH AND
ALL
THE QUARTERS OF THE SKY, IS PERVADED."
The concept of universal oneness cannot be easily
grasped. The more one realises it, the more one gets
staggered at the immensity of it all. A limited intellect
cannot but shudder at the manifestation of such a vast and
majestic Truth.
SEEING THE MARVELLOUS AND THE AWFUL FORM,
ARJUNA SAYS, "THE WORLDS ARE TREMBLING." It is
psychologically true that each man sees the world as he
himself is. We look at the world through the windows of
our mind; as our mind is, so is the world to us. Arjuna felt
staggered and trembling in himself when he looked at the
world in that mental condition, and he could not but see
that the whole world was equally wonder-struck and
trembling as he himself was. Even while he is preoccupied
with the great theme in hand, Vyasa does not forget the
fundamental behaviour in man. These fine touches add a
glow of realism to this mystic picture of imcomparable
beauty and immeasurable depth.
ARJUNA HAD A DOUBT REGARDING THE
POSSIBILITIES OF SUCCESS IN THE WAR.* IN ORDER
815
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
TO REMOVE THIS, LORD KRISHNA NOW GIVES
ARJUNA A PEEP INTO THE FUTURE THAT IS IN
STORE FOR THE WORLD:
21. Verily, into You enter these hosts of DEVAS; some extol
You in fear with joined palms; "May it be well" thus saying,
bands of great RISHIS and SIDDHAS praise You with hymns
sublime.
The running commentary given out so long by Arjuna was
the description of a stagnant Cosmic-Form, at once
"marvellous and awful." Here we find Arjuna describing
the movements and actions that he observes in that
Cosmic-Form of the Lord. "THESE HOSTS OF DEITIES"
enter into and disappear in the Universal-Form. Shankara,
commenting upon the expression "HOSTS OF DEITIES,"
interprets it to mean the Duryodhana-fold. Though this
interpretation is not inconsistent with what is yet to
follow, it is true that this meaning is not the natural
interpretation of the terms used in the text.
If some, who are thus irredeemably drawn towards the
Lord's Form, disappear therein, others who are waiting
and watching the process are necessarily getting panicky
with fear. When man is threatened with a sure mishap,
and when he knows of no remedy or defence against it,
he, in his despair, always turns to prayer. This
psychological truth is beautifully brought out here, when
816
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
it explains how "SOME IN FEAR EXTOL THEE WITH
JOINED PALMS."
And this is not all. Bands of great Rishis and perfected-
men (Siddhas) who are not at all perturbed by the Vision of
the Totality, because of their super-human tranquillity and
inward peace arising from their own "wisdom," merely
sing sublime hymns of glory to the mighty appearance of
the total phenomenal world of multiplicity. They do so
wishing "MAY PEACE BE" to all, always. They realise in
their "wisdom" that the face of the cosmos assumes such a
terrible ferocity only when it has launched a wholesale
reconstruction scheme. The mean of wisdom also know
that nothing is lost in such a programme of "construction
through destruction." Therefore, they hail this process and
wish the world a brilliant golden era, which is sure to
follow immediately after such a total upheaval.
In this stanza, the entire world of phenomena has been
beautifully brought under three heads: the "Sub-normal,"
the "Normal," and the "Super-normal." The "Sub-normal"
unconsciously die away. They are the victims of the
process of death and they are so miserably unaware of the
very process, that they do not at all revolt against it. The
"Normal" dread when they intelligently observe and
become aware of the process of decay and death. They
become apprehensive of their own fate; and failing to
realise that nothing is lost by death, they, in their
ignorance, shudder at the inescapable lot of all living
names and forms.
817
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
There is yet another set constituted of "Super-normal"
men, who have sufficient apprehension of the Totality and
Its behaviour, and who are not at all perturbed even if
what is happening in the Universe everyday, were to visit
them also one day. When bubbles are broken, there is no
occasion to regret for those who know what they are and
how they are born. Similarly, when these Siddhas see the
upheaval that precedes a dying culture's reorientation,
they recognise therein the mighty Power of Truth and
wish only good luck and peace to the world so
reconstructed by the very hands of the Lord.
In whichever light we may observe this work, we must
come to realise how great a psychologist Vyasa himself
must have been and also how beautifully the knowledge
of the mental behaviour has been harnessed for
quickening the evolution of man to reach the fulfilment of
all his struggles.
HOW THEN DID THE GODS OF THE HEAVENS
REACT TO THIS SPECTACULAR VISION OF THE
COSMIC-MAN IN ACTION?
22. THE RUDRAS, ADITYAS, VASUS, SADHYAS,
VISHWE-DEVAS, THE TWO ASHWINS, MARUTS,
USHMAPAS AND HOSTS OF GANDHARVAS,
YAKSHAS, ASURAS AND SIDDHAS --- they are all looking
at you, all quite astonished.
818
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Continuing the description, Arjuna says that among the
hosts of being who gaze on at the Mysterious Form, there
are Deities who are all the Lords of the phenomena,
worshipped and revered by the generations of the Vedic
period. Even they, looking at the Universal Form, stand
struck with wonder and astonishment.
The terms used here have all been described during our
discourses on the previous chapters. The Spirits of
Destruction (Rudras), the Sun (Adityas), the Lord of the
seasons (Vasus), the Spirits of the Sky (Sadhyas), the Lesser
Lords (Vishwe-devas), the Horsemen Twins (Ashwins), the
Storm-Lords (Maruts), the Heat-drinkers (Ushmapas), the
hosts of Heavenly Musicians (Gandharvas), Yakshas, Asuras
and Siddhas --- these constitute the crowd that gaze at the
terrible form of the Lord, "ALL QUITE ASTOUNDED."
This stanza may not be quite appealing to us who are
today strangers to the conceptions which these terms
represent. But Arjuna was a student of the Vedas, and was
the child of the age; he was naturally well versed in these
Vedic thoughts and therefore the vocabulary of Arjuna
could not have been otherwise. We have only to watch for,
and understand, the general effect produced upon the
Pandava warrior by the Vision of the Totality and the
different reactions created in different types of minds.
Each, according to its own intrinsic capacity,
comprehended and appreciated the Vision of the entire
Universe, so crystallised into the definite shapeless shape.
819
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
GIVING MORE AND MORE SURE STROKES, ARJUNA
IS BRINGING OUT HIS EXPERIENCES TO A PRECISE
CONCEPTION UPON THE CANVAS OF HIS
LISTENER'S MIND:
23. Having seen Your immeasurable Form, with many mouths
and eyes, O Mighty-armed, with many arms, thighs, and feet,
with many stomachs and fearsome with many tusks, the worlds
are terrified and so too am I.
24. On seeing you, with Your Form touching the sky, flaming
in many colours, with mouths wide open, with large fiery eyes, I
am terrified at heart, and I find neither courage, nor peace, O
Vishnu!
The uncommon vision, "MARVELLOUS AND AWFUL,"
experienced by Arjuna, was not a localised form on a six-
footed Lord Krishna. It was, in fact, a manifestation, wide
and varied, extending almost to the frontiers of the All-
pervading. And yet, the Pandava Prince realised it all in
his inward vision as a limited form, having a definite
shape. In the intellectual understanding of all shapeless
qualities (like freedom, love, nationality, etc.), one gives
them each a substantiality, a form, well-defined and
precisely outlined for one's own intellect, although never
for one's own sense-organs. Similarly, Arjuna too feels
that, the experience of the Universal-Form, though All-
pervading, has for him a definite shape. But when he tries
to define the Form-Universal, so well realised by him, his
820
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
very expressions belie his own feelings and defeat his own
purpose.
Arjuna finds that the entire world is terrified by the Great
Grand Form representing in itself "MANY MOUTHS
AND EYES, MANY ARMS AND THIGHS, WITH MANY
STOMACHS, AND FEARSOME WITH MANY TUSKS."
He also adds, "SO AM I." Psychologically, when an
individual is in a crowd of excited people or in the
company of good men of peaceful contemplation, he
vicariously gathers unto himself the mental qualities of
the crowd in which he finds himself. "THE WORLD IS
TERRIFIED," and, Arjuna confesses, "I TOO AM."
At the same time, the Pandava Prince feels it insulting and
cowardly for his royal heart to feel any fear. Therefore,
justifying his own fear, he describes the Terrible-Form to
be in fact formless, and says that it absorbs into itself
everything. The Universal-Form touches the very skies
above. It glows with a variety of colours. Its fiery-eyes
glow. Its open mouths consume everything. Altogether,
the vision is capable of unnerving even the gods. Seeing
that 'Vision' Arjuna confesses, "MY HEART QUAKES,
AND I LOSE MY COURAGE AND MY PEACE." It is very
significant that it is in this condition of benumbing fear
that the great hero addresses the cosmic-vision, "O,
Vishnu."*
As I said in the beginning, the conception-form so clearly
defined in the intuitive understanding of Arjuna, is in fact
821
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Infinite described in terms of Its own endless
manifestations as the names and forms in the Universe.
We, the students of the Geeta, should never forget these
subtle under-currents of thought that Vyasa has so
secretly kept for the profit of all diligent and sincere
seekers of Truth.
ELABORATING HIS OWN SELF-EXPLANATIONS ON
WHY HEROIC HEARTS SHOULD TREMBLE IN FEAR,
THE PANDAVA PRINCE CONTINUES:
25. Having seen your mouths fearsome with tusks (blazing) like
PRALAYA fires, I know not the four quarters, nor do I find
peace; be gracious, O Lord of the DEVAS, O Abode of the
Universe.
"SEEING THE UNIVERSAL-MOUTH TERRIBLE WITH
TUSKS, THREATENING AS THE FIRE-OF-DELUGE,"
CONFESSES ARJUNA, "I HAVE LOST MY SENSE OF
DIRECTION AND I FEEL NO PEACE." This is the picture
of Time --- Time, the leveller of everything, the consumer
of all forms. When the intellect comes to comprehend such
a vast field, and that too all of a sudden, the very
magnitude of it smothers all powers of discrimination and
benumbs the individual for a moment. This chaotic
condition of confusion is expressed here, "I KNOW NOT
THE FOUR QUARTERS." And this is not all. "I FIND NO
PEACE" either.
822
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In such a condition of extreme wonderment, the
astounded mortal comes to realise that his physical might,
his mental capacities and his intellectual subtleties are all,
both individually and in their aggregate, unimportant
vehicles indeed. The little ego drops down its veil of
vanity and its armour of false strength, and stands naked
meekly surrendering itself to the influence of the Cosmic-
Power. Prayer is the only resort of the individual, who has
thus fully realised the emptiness of his own hollow
vanities, in the presence of the Mighty-Total and the
Supreme-Divine.
In concluding the stanza with the humble prayer, "BE
GRACIOUS, O LORD, THOU ART THE HOME OF THE
UNIVERSE," Vyasa has rightly indicated that true prayers
can never rise up from a heart that is swollen with pride
and entertains an exaggerated sense of self-importance.
Only when man understands his own individual
insignificance, in the context of the total Universe, then
true prayer can rise up from him almost involuntarily.
THIS PARTICULAR SECTION (Starting from XI-21) IS
MAINLY FOR REASSURING ARJUNA OF THE
SUCCESS THAT IS YET TO COME IN THE FUTURE FOR
HIMSELF AND HIS ARMY. THEREFORE, THE LORD
DIRECTLY SHOWS THE FORCES ENTER THE
INESCAPABLE "MOUTH OF TIME" AND DISAPPEAR:
823
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
26. All the sons of Dhritarashtra with hosts of kings of the earth,
Bhishma, Drona and the son of a charioteer, Karna, with the
warrior chieftains of ours;
27. Into Your mouths, with terrible teeth, and fearful to behold,
they precipitately enter. Some are found sticking in the gaps
between the teeth with their heads crushed into pulp.
A philosophy that comprehends the totality without fear
or favour and is even true to its mission of seeking Truth,
cannot afford to ignore the DESTRUCTIVE-aspect in
nature. No creation is possible without being preceded by
the process of destruction of its own existence as the raw
material from which the created is produced. On the face
of the Universe also, wherever there is "existence" it is
nothing but a repetition of constant change, and change
can be interpreted either in terms of constant-creation
with regard to the MADE-PRODUCTS, or as a process of
constant-destruction with regard to the RAW-MATERIAL
that changed.
Thus, we see that in Hinduism, the daring Masters of the
Aryan fold, while extolling the beauty of the Reality,
indulged themselves in viewing It not only as the
Omniscient-Creator, or as the Omnipotent-Sustainer, but
also as the All-powerful-Devourer of all names and forms.
This may look dreadful to those creeds that have not yet
come to watch and analyse Life in its totality.
824
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna's words are significant. He does not see the
Universal-Form itself devouring the names and forms. On
the other hand, he observed that all names and forms
"ENTER IN HASTE INTO THY MOUTH." When we
watch an ocean, we do not find the ocean ever rising up to
absorb the waves, but the waves which have risen from
the ocean, after a momentary play upon the surface, rush
back to disappear into the very ocean. The multiplicity
that has risen from the Totality, after its play upon the
surface of Truth, must necessarily rush back in all hurry
into the very Whole from which they had arisen.
Arjuna watches "ALL THE SONS OF DHRITARASHTRA,
THE HOSTS OF KINGS, BHISHMA, DRONA, KARNA,
THE SON OF A CHARIOTEER, ALONG WITH THE
WARRIOR CHIEFTAINS OF OURS" entering
precipitately into the yawning mouth of the Principle of
Destruction in nature. This not only frightens Arjuna and
unnerves him, but also gives him a confidence to look
ahead --- in spite of the fact that in numerical strength, in
supplies, and in technicians, his own army was much
inferior to the mighty forces of the Kurus. The Vision
which he saw, was in fact a peep into the future. In the
Vishwaroopa, when the Lord expresses Himself as the
entire world of phenomena, a conception of oneness arises
in which not only space shrinks, but even Time becomes
an object-of-observation.
It is no wonder, therefore, that Arjuna saw in that picture
THE PAST MERGING WITH THE PRESENT AND
825
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
MOVING FORWARD TO MINGLE WITH THE ENTIRE
FUTURE. When I have the entire Geeta-book before me, I
can read either the preceding two pages or can skip over
them and read the third page ahead or, according to my
will and desire, continue reading this very same page.
Similarly, when the whole Universe is brought at once
within the compass of Arjuna's vision, he could see herein
at one gaze "ALL THE HERE AND THE THERE, AND
THE EVERYWHERE" --- so too THE PAST, THE
PRESENT AND THE FUTURE. The modern scientists also
have now come to realise and accept that Time and Space
are one and the same, and they are each expressed in
terms of the other.*
The seekers of Truth, themselves truthful, were not all all
afraid if their enquiry took them to the aspect of the
terrible in the Truth. The world is a combination of the
beautiful and the ugly, the good and the bad, the soft and
the hard, the sweet and the bitter. God, the Lord, has
Himself become all these, and therefore, no adoration of
the Lord, or estimate of the Reality, will be complete, if,
according to our taste, we recognise only the beautiful, the
good, the soft, and the sweet aspects of Him. An
unprejudiced and detached mind will have to recognise
Him as the ugly and the bad, the hard and the bitter also.
That philosophy alone is complete which points out that
the Supreme is, in fact, in Its Absolute Nature, beyond all
these qualities.
826
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In a purely scientific approach, therefore, Arjuna is made
to express all the details, even if they be blood-curdling
and gruesome. No doubt, the Geeta has its own sense of
realism. The mouth of death is described here with all
faithfulness
as "TERRIBLE WITH TUSKS," "FEARFUL TO BEHOLD."
HOW DO THEY ENTER THY MOUTH? ARJUNA SAYS:
28. Verily, as many torrents of rivers flow towards the ocean, so
these heroes in the world of men enter Your flaming mouths.
In this stanza, the analogy of the torrential rivers, gushing
ahead to reach the ocean and become one with it, is used.
Each river has, no doubt, its own distinct personality,
gathered from the nature and condition of the very terrain
through which it has flowed. At no point does any river
pause or hesitate to gush forward. An observer of limited
powers of understanding may say that each drop of water
in its flow in the river is moving towards a known point
down on its way; but, to a true observer, all rivers flow
towards the ocean and they cannot, and will not, stop
until they reach the ocean, having reached which, all
distinctions end.
Each drop of water in the river came from the ocean --- in
the form of a cloud it reached the mountains, and there in
the form of rain it manifested; watering the lands on the
827
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
banks and supplying life and nourishment to the fields,
they gushed down in their torrential haste to the very
basin from which they took off on this "MERCY FLIGHT."
Similarly, from the Totality, the individuals have come to
serve the race, to nourish the culture, to contribute to the
beauty of the world...and yet, on their pilgrimage none of
them can pause even for a moment en route. All must
rush towards the Source from which they arose. The river
loses nothing by reaching the ocean. Even though it
gathers enroute certain special qualities, and therefore, a
special name, and has, for itself, a separate tangible form,
it is all a temporary phase, a convenience taken up by "the
waters of the ocean" to make the dry land smile in plenty.
The more thought is given to it, the more can this stanza
yield its secret joys and expose its innate beauty.
WHY AND HOW DO THEY ENTER?
Arjuna says: 29. As moths rush hurriedly into a blazing fire for
their own destruction, so also these creatures hastily rush into
Your mouths of destruction.
The essential oneness between the MANIFEST that has
come out of the UNMANIFEST, and the very
UNMANIFEST which is the womb-of-manifestation, has
been beautifully brought out by the picture of the river,
which has risen from the ocean and is, in all haste, rushing
828
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
down only to lose its very name and form, and become
one with the ocean.
No analogy can be complete in itself. The picture of the
river does not show any intrinsic conscious effort on the
part of the river to reach the ocean. The living kingdom,
with its own free discrimination, it may be doubted, may
not act as the inert waters of the river. To show that even
the sentient beings are irresistibly drawn towards the
mouth of their own destruction, by the whipping hand of
instinct, the example of "THE MOTHS PRECIPITATELY
RUSHING INTO THE BLAZING FIRE TO PERISH" is
given. To Vyasa, the entire nature seems to be an open
book-of-scripture, explaining everywhere in all its
happenings, the fundamental facts that "the projection of
the unmanifest to the manifest-condition is the PROCESS
OF CREATION" and that "the manifest merging back to
its own heaven of the unmanifest is DESTRUCTION OR
DEATH." That terrible looking monstrous happening
called 'death,' when approached in a correct perspective
and with true understanding, unmasks itself to reveal a
gladdening face, ever cheerful and gay.
Arjuna's mental tension was mainly created by his hasty
evaluation of the enormous destruction he would be
causing in the battle-field of Kurukshetra. Krishna has to
cure him, by lifting him to heights from which he could
witness and realise, in one sweeping gaze, the
unavoidable phenomenon of death. A close and full
understanding of any happening removes the fangs from
829
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
its threatening hood! It is only when the discriminating
intellect of man becomes doped with "ignorance," that the
happenings around him can threaten to smother him
down. As the river hastens to the ocean, and the moths
into the fire, so too all names and forms must, and most
irresistibly do, rush towards the unmanifest. With this
realisation, anyone can thereafter face life, fearless of
death, since life itself becomes to him a process of
continuous change.
THEREFORE DEATH, AS A PLAY-OF-TIME, BECOMES
A STINGLESS PHENOMENON. THIS IS GLORIFIED IN
ALL ITS FEROCIOUS BEAUTY IN THE FOLLOWING
VERSES:
30. Devouring all worlds on every side with Your flaming
mouths, You are licking (in enjoyment). Your fierce rays, filling
the whole world with radiance, are burning, O Vishnu.
After composing some surging poetry, Vyasa faithfully
comes back to the line of thought he was developing
earlier. Hosts of men and things of the world reach the
Mouth to perish therein. The hungry Mouth is never tired,
for, the principle of destruction has a never-ending
appetite, and after "SWALLOWING ALL THE WORLD
ALL AROUND, YOU ARE LICKING YOUR LIPS,"
exclaims Arjuna.
830
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In fact, the stanza clearly brings forth the implication
underlying the concept of the Trinity. The Creator, the
Sustainer, and the Destroyer are three distinct entities in
concept, but in their actual workings, they constitute a
simultaneous process. Creation is continued in a chain of
destruction, and the process of destruction is not a total
annihilation but only a change from one form to another
thereby ending in a new Creation. "Constructive
destruction" is the secret philosophy behind the continuity
of existence observed everywhere.
In a cinema show, the various poses on the film are made
to run on in front of the arc-light, and each picture that has
passed away from the arc-light may be considered as
dead, and those reaching the arc-light as those that are
born. The continuity in these two series of happenings of
births and deaths, or constructions and destructions, gives
us the hallucination of a logical sequence in the theme
revealed on the screen. Conditioned by 'place and time,'
things and beings, happenings and circumstances, come
and go in the plane of our experiences and their continuity
is what we experience as "existence."
The above idea can be repeated in the language of our
traditional belief in the Trinity. Brahmaji, the Creator,
cannot create unless Shiva, the Destroyer, is functioning
simultaneously on the same anvil. And Vishnu, the
Sustainer, will never come to play unless the Creator and
the Destroyer work feverishly and consistently. The whole
world of multiplicity is thus an expression of Vishnu, the
831
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Sustainer, which is nothing other than the product of the
game played by both the Creator and the Destroyer!
When, with such depth of understanding, Arjuna looks at
the mighty resplendence of the Totality-Form, he feels
almost blindfolded by "THE FIERY RADIANCE OF ITS
FIERCE RAYS."
YOU ARE FEARSOME; THEREFORE:
31. Tell me, who You are, so fierce in form? Salutations to You,
O God Supreme; have mercy. I desire to know You, the Original
Being, I know not indeed Your purpose.
Arjuna realises suddenly the sanctity and the divinity of
the Lord's Power, and so, in a inspired rush of veneration,
he bows down to Him whom till now he took to be but a
cowherd boy of Vrindavana. Intellectual though he may
be, here is an experience too big for him to observe fully,
analyse carefully, and digest completely. The only thing
he can do is to surrender himself at the very feet of the
Lord, requesting Him, "TELL ME WHO YOU ARE."
To reinforce the solidity of the query, Arjuna indicates that
his question deserves an answer, for, "I DESIRE TO
KNOW THEE, O PRIMEVAL ONE." It is very well known
in the textbooks of spirituality, that "a burning aspiration
to know" is the motive force behind every seeker's mind
and intellect. But here Arjuna is preoccupied with the
832
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
problem of challenge that is facing him, and therefore, he
is not, in fact, directly seeking the Divine Truth behind the
Vision. His enquiry is highly coloured by the emotion of
fear in him and his anxiety to know what would be the
outcome of the war. This is clear from the last line wherein
he himself explains: Indeed I know not "YOUR
PURPOSE." The enquiry made here is "What is the
mission of the Lord in taking such a terrible form, and in
presenting Himself in front of Arjuna, exhibiting how the
Kaurava forces are marching in all hurry towards the
burning Mouth-of-Death?" When he intensely longs for a
thing to happen and when sure signs, forecasting his
success, present themselves, he needs a confirmation from
others. Here Arjuna is witnessing what he exactly wishes
should happen. But the Prince wants to get a confirmation
of the same from Krishna Himself. Hence this question.
INTRODUCING HIMSELF AS THE MANIFESTATION
OF TRUTH IN ITS ASPECT OF DESTRUCTION, THE
LORD IN THE UNIVERSAL FROM DECLARES:
The Blessed Lord said: 32. I am the mighty world-destroying
Time, now engaged in destroying the worlds. Even without
You, none of the warriors arrayed in hostile armies shall live.
No construction of a thing is possible without a
corresponding destruction of its own previous condition.
The world is created by a continuous process of
destruction. Today has arisen from the graves of
833
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
yesterday. Childhood dies before youth appears. And
when youth passes away, old age takes its birth. The
power visibly playing behind constructive destruction is
the fundamental Power that rules over and governs the
life of beings. Krishna introduces Himself here as "I AM
MIGHTY WORLD-DESTROYING TIME," who has
manifested to wipe out the generation that has suffered
decay in its own false sense-of-values and wrong
assumptions about life and its purpose.
The world-destroying attitude of the Lord is not at all
against His all-merciful concept. Sometimes there is mercy
in destruction. A broken bridge, a dilapidated dam, and
an ancient building are instances in point. To pull them
down is the most merciful act of charity that any
considerate government can do to the community; so too
here.
By declaring that the very purpose behind this
manifestation is to destroy totally the negative forces that
strangle the cultural life of the country, Krishna is
confirming Arjuna's vague hope that there is yet a chance
of victory for his army. Reassuring the very same idea, the
Universal-Form here declares that in the great mission of
reconstruction, the Lord is not depending upon any
individual or individuals. It is Time that is going to bring
the renaissance and achieve the revival. In such a colossal
movement of universal rehabilitation, individuals are but
mere creatures of destiny. In spite of them, and with or
without their co-operation, Time's plans will be worked
834
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
out. The country needs the revival; the world demands
man's rehabilitation. Krishna clearly says, "EVEN
WITHOUT YOU" none of the warriors manning the
secular folly of sheer materialism shall survive the war of
the imminent cultural upheaval.
In the context of the Mahabharata story, it almost amounts
to saying that the Kaurava forces have all been killed
already by Time, and that Arjuna, by co-operating and
servicing the Army of Renaissance, is only backing the
sure success.
THEREFORE, AS A REPRESENTATIVE MAN OF ALL
TIMES, ARJUNA IS ADVISED TO PERFORM FEARLESS
ACTION IN LIFE:
33. Therefore, stand up, and obtain fame. Conquer the enemies
and enjoy the flourishing kingdom. Verily by Myself they have
already been slain; be you a mere instrument, O left-handed
archer.
34. Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, and other brave
warriors --- those have already been slain by Me; you do kill; be
not distressed with fear; fight and you shall conquer your
enemies in battle.
Here Lord Krishna is very directly consoling Arjuna that
he should stand up and catch the Time and claim success
and glory. Whatever be the might and strength of the
835
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
negative forces, the all-consuming Might-of-Change has
already destroyed them all, and Arjuna has only to come
forward, act the part of a hero and claim the crown of
victory all to himself: "I HAVE ALREADY SLAIN THEM,
BE MERELY AN APPARENT CAUSE, YOU, O LEFT-
HANDED ARCHER."
In fact, to every thinking man, the truth is obvious that in
life, he is at best only an instrument in His hands. We are
not generally ready to accept this proposition, because, the
self-arrogating ego-sense in us will not easily retire so as
to allow the Divine in us to play out in all its omnipotence.
Everywhere, in all our activities, when we analyse each
one of our actions, we find that our actual contribution in
them all is a meagre share, compared to what nature has
applied, and what the unseen hand has achieved for us.
At best, we can only combine things that already exist,
and coax out of their own natural qualities and properties,
a certain result, and then claim vainly that we have
created something new.
The radio, the aeroplane, the roaring engines, the subtle
machinery, the wonder-drugs, in short, the entire "Brave
New World," and all its achievements in progress --- are
all nothing but the play of children in the lap of the Lord
who, in fact, is the One who has ordered and allowed us
to have electricity, iron, ether, air, etc., with their special
properties. Without these, no achievement is ever
possible; and achievements are nothing but intelligent acts
836
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the assembling and reassembling of these very God-
given things.
The concept of self-surrender and the theory of serving
the world in constant awareness of the Lord, are not idle
dreams prescribed for escaping the gross realities of the
world. It is essential for man to raise his calibre and
temper so as to work efficiently and achieve success in the
world. It is the technique of keeping oneself constantly in
a mood of tireless enthusiasm and joyous inspiration.
The world is too much with the ego. To the extent the ego
is surrendered in the awareness of the greater and the
nobler, to that extent, the entire world and achievements
therein become a game of simple and sure success
everywhere. Earlier in the Geeta, it was, at many points,
strictly pointed out that through the technique of self-
surrender, the greater possibilities can be milked out of us.
The same idea is again repeated here. The entire army has
been invited here only to play the part of the hero --- serve
as His Instruments and let them claim for themselves the
crown and the glory as their wages.
Arjuna had certain reasons why he should be particularly
afraid of some of the top men in the Kaurava forces. They
are taken up one by one and the Lord indicates how even
they have already been killed by the All-consuming Time-
Spirit.
837
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Drona was Arjuna's teacher who taught him the art of
archery. The Acharya had with him some special weapons
and he was particularly revered and respected by Arjuna.
The grandsire Bhishma had his death at his command,
and he too had very powerful celestial weapons. Once in
the past Bhishma had made Parashurama lick the ground.
Jayadratha was invincible; for, his father who was
engaged in tapas, had firmly resolved that "whoever
causes my son's head to drop down on earth, his head too
shall fall." Karna also had a powerful missile given to him
by Indra. It becomes clear now why these four names are
particularly enumerated by the Lord in the list of
personalities that Time had already devastated. Even
these great warriors have been eliminated by the
Principle-of-Destruction, and thereby, it has been brought
home to Arjuna that the field is clear for him to play his
part and advance towards the throne and crown, and
claim the entire glory is his own.
IT IS NATURAL THAT, WHEN A BURNING DESIRE IN
AN INDIVIDUAL IS FULFILLED, HE SUDDENLY
BURSTS INTO AN IRRESISTIBLE GLORIFICATION OF
HIS KINDLY PATRON:
Sanjaya said: 35. Having heard that speech of Keshava
(Krishna), the crowned-one (Arjuna), with joined palms,
trembling and prostrating himself, again addressed Krishna, in
a choked voice, bowing down, overwhelmed with fear.
838
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The dramatist in Vyasa, with his innate craftsmanship,
lifts the scene from the battle front to the quiet and silent
chambers of the palace, where the blind Dhritarashtra is
listening to 'the running commentary' given by Sanjaya. In
thus lifting the reader more than once* away from the
awe-inspiring atmosphere of Kurukshetra, Vyasa is not
only adding dynamic movement to the picture but also
giving a necesary psychological rest for the reader's mind
from such a subtle theme of awful beauty.
It is not to be forgotten at all that Sanjaya in the Geeta is
"OUR OWN SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT," who is fully
sympathetic with the righteous cause of the Pandavas.
Naturally, therefore, as soon as he reports the Lord's own
words --- that all the mighty men of the times, who are the
top-ranking men in position in the Kaurava forces, have
already been annihilated --- he wants to bring to the blind
old man's awareness, the magnitude of the impending
disaster. As we have noticed earlier, the only one who
could call the war off, even at this moment, is
Dhritarashtra himself. And Sanjaya is very anxious to see
that the war is not fought. Thus, we see here, in the stanza,
in the very language used, the motive of the reporter.
HAVING HEARD THE WORDS OF KESHAVA,
ARJUNA, THE CROWNED-ONE, WITH FOLDED
PALMS AND TREMBLING WITH FEAR, ADDRESSED
AGAIN --- The very language used and the picture
drawn, reflect the mind of the reporter. Suddenly, Arjuna
is called here as "the crowned-one," perhaps, as a bold
839
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
forecast, by which Sanjaya expects Dhritarashtra to see the
folly of the disastrous war. But a blind man can never SEE
things, and much less if he is intellectually blind with
delusion.
If the good sense of the blind king cannot be invoked
because of his extremely deluded love for his children,
Sanjaya expects to give a psychological treatment to the
royal father. A lengthy description of how others are
getting frightened is a sure method of spreading panic
even among moderately courageous listeners. If Arjuna,
the warrior, the bosom friend of Krishna is "TREMBLING
AND ADDRESSING THE LORD IN A CHOCKED
VOICE, OVER-WHELMED WITH FEAR," Sanjaya expects
every sensible man to realise the horrors of the war that is
imminent, and the dire consequences that are in store for
the vanquished. Even these words of Sanjaya have no
effect upon Dhritarashtra who is blind to everything
except his mad affection for his own children.
ARJUNA APOSTROPHIZES THE UNIVERSAL-FORM:
Arjuna said: 36. It is but meet, O Hrishikesha (Krishna), that
the world delights and rejoices in Thy praise; RAKSHASAS fly
in fear to all quarters, and all hosts of SIDDHAS bow to Thee.
Again from the luxurious chambers of riches and
splendour, the students of the Geeta are lifted, on the
lyrical charm of the poem, to the humming ground of the
840
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
battle-field and to the Wonder-Form of the Lord. The
picture of Arjuna addressing the Lord with his hands
folded, trembling with fear, singing songs of adoration,
with a throat chocked with fear and wonderment is
effectively drawn. This passage, containing the following
ELEVEN stanzas, represents one of the most beautiful
prayers that we have in Hinduism. In fact, the words and
the ideas expressed hereunder are so general in their
import and significance that we can almost say that no
better Universal Prayer can ever be conceived of, either in
its concept, beauty, or cadence, or in the depth of the
message in its words.
In these passages, the cognising power in Arjuna is
steadily realising the diviner Truth behind the details of
that Total-Form. When one watches and sees one's own
reflection in a mirror, it is rarely that the observer sees the
mirror-surface. When one watches the surface of the
mirror, the reflection is either not at all available or, at best
is only dimly recognised. So long as Arjuna is preoccupied
with the details of the Universal-Form, he does not realise,
or recognise, the Infinite which is the very core of the
Vishwaroopa. In these passages, it is evident that Arjuna
has started sensing the deeper meaning that lies behind
the cosmic wonder represented to him in his vision
Divine.
37. And why should they not, O Great-souled One, bow to Thee,
greater (than all else), the Primal Cause even of Brahma, O
841
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Infinite Being, O Lord of Lords, O Abode of the Universe, You
are the Imperishable, that which is beyond both the Manifest and
the Unmanifest.
WHY SHOULD THEY NOT BOW DOWN TO THE
GREAT ONE --- Because the Lord as the Primal Cause of
even the Creator, who creates the entire universe of
multiplicity, is like the mud in all mud-pots, or the gold in
all gold ornaments. The ornaments or the pots have no
existence at all apart from the gold-essence or the mud-
essence in them. Thus, the Primal Cause is that which
pervades everything and is that which holds together all
names and forms. Infinite in nature, the Lord is not only
the Universe, but he is the Lord of all Lords, inasmuch as
even the denizens of the heavens and the great
phenomenal powers --- all derive their individual might
from the Source of all Powers, this Infinite Truth.
The entire world of things-and-beings that exist, can fall
under two categories: the Manifest (sat) and the
Unmanifest (asat). The manifest is that which can become
objects of experience for the organs-of-perception, for the
instrument-of-feeling and the equipment-of-thought. The
Unmanifest is that which causes the perceptions, feelings,
and thoughts. These subtle causes that order the
individuals to live in the world outside, are called vasanas
and these constitute the Unmanifest. Arjuna's beautiful
definition of the Lord accepts that the Lord is not only the
Manifest (sat), but the Unmanifest (asat) as well. And He is
also that which transcends them both.
842
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
AND THAT WHICH IS BEYOND THEM --- In the theatre
we can enjoy both tragedy and comedy, but the light that
illumines the stage is that which transcends them both.
The wedding-ring is, no doubt, made of gold; the
wedding-necklace is also, no doubt, made of gold. But
gold cannot be defined as the necklace or the ring. We will
have to say that gold is not only the ring or the necklace
but also that which transcend them both. In this sense, the
Lord, being the essential Truth in all names and forms, is
both the Manifest and the Unmanifest, and He also has a
status that transcends both these conditions. In fact, that
which makes both the Manifest and the Unmanifest
possible is the Light of Awareness, the Pure
Consciousness, the Universal Lord, whom Arjuna is
invoking here.
THESE FEW STANZAS* REPRESENT THE MOST
UNIVERSAL PRAYER THAT WE HAVE IN ALL THE
RELIGIOUS LITERATURE OF THE WORLD. THERE
CANNOT BE ANY CREED OR CASTE WHICH HAS
ANY OBJECTION TO THESE, INASMUCH AS THEY
SUMMARISE THE ENTIRE GALAXY OF PHILOSOPHIC
THOUGHTS REGARDING THE ETERNAL, AND
EXPAND WITH THEM THE DEVOTEE'S HEART
WHICH CAN REACH DIMENSIONS ALMOST
UNKNOWABLE, YET WITHIN A DEVOTEE'S
EXPERIENCE. ARJUNA EXTOLS THE LORD THUS:
843
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
38. You are the Primal God, the Ancient PURUSHA; You are
the Supreme Refuge of this universe. You are the knower, the
knowable, and the Abode-Supreme. By Thee is the universe
pervaded, O Being of Infinite forms.
YOU ARE THE PRIMAL GOD --- The Self is the Supreme
Creator. The Pure Consciousness is the womb from which
even the Creator has risen. The Self, conditioned by Its
own creative urge, plays the part of the Creator.
YOU ARE THE SUPREME ABODE OF THE UNIVERSE --
- The entire Vishwa is housed in the Lord, and therefore, it
is said that the Lord is the Abode for the Universe. Here,
the term Vishwa is to be correctly understood. When this is
translated as the "Universe," we are apt to confuse it with
the astronomers' universe or the scientists' universe. The
Sanskrit term Vishwa includes these and even more. It
includes the entire world of perceptions and the whole
field of emotions and the total realms of thought that we,
as intelligent individuals, experience in all our lives. This
totality of the world of experience through the body, mind
and intellect together is indicated by the term Vishwa.
With this understanding of the term Vishwa, it should not
be very difficult for the students of Vedanta to understand
the full meaning of this life. We are all now experiencing
our world through the matter equipments of our body,
mind and intellect. These, being products of inert matter,
have no Consciousness of their own except that which
they borrow from the Infinite, the Self.
844
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
These matter envelopments, we have already indicated,
are not produced from the Self, as the Self is changeless.
The world of matter cannot be said to arise from any other
independent source, since the Self is All-pervading and is
the One-without-a-second. Therefore, it is explained that
the Vishwa is but a superimposition upon the Truth, as the
ghost-vision gained on a post. In all such hallucinations,
the post is the abode of the ghost, of the emotions which it
creates, and of the thoughts it generates. There is no truth
in the ghost apart from the post from which it borrows its
ghost-form. Thus, it is the Self that is indicated here by
Arjuna when he so beautifully sings that the Lord is the
"Supreme Abode" of the entire Vishwa.
THOU ART THE KNOWER AND THE KNOWABLE ---
The Awareness in us is the Factor that completes all our
experiences as realities. If the Light of Awareness were not
to illumine the inert world-of-matter, no knowledge
would have been possible, and therefore, the Principle of
Consciousness, represented here as Lord Krishna, the
Charioteer --- is described here as the Knower. All the
techniques of Self-realisation are methods of gathering our
Consciousness from all its channels of dissipation, so that,
in the still moments of thoughtless Awareness, the Self is
automatically RECOGNISED. It is thus said 'the
Knowable,' or the realisable.
YOU PERVADE THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE OF FORMS ---
Just as sweetness pervades all chocolates, as the ocean
pervades all waves, the Lord, being the essence, pervades
845
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
everything. It was said just a little before, that the super-
impositions cannot exist apart from the Substratum upon
which they are being perceived. The Self is the Substratum
on which the multitude of the world-of-plurality is
visualised, and therefore, it is rightly said that "HE
PERVADES ALL." This is only a repetition of the great
Upanishadic Truth that "the Infinite pervades all, and
nothing pervades It."
39. You are VAYU, YAMA, AGNI, VARUNA, the Moon,
PRAJAPATI, and the great-grandfather of all. Salutations!
Salutations unto You a thousand times, and again salutations
unto You!
So far Arjuna was chanting the glories of the God in His
transcendental form. A devotee (Upasaka) may wonder
what exactly the relationship of the Supreme with his
particular Lord-of-the-heart (Upasya) is. The forms and
names of Deities conceived of, and fervently prayed to in
ancient times, are generally representations of the
manifested phenomenal powers.
In the Vedic period, Vayu (the Wind), Yama (the
Destroyer), Agni (the Fire), Varuna (the Sea-god),
Shashanka (the Moon)* and Prajapati (The Creator) were
considered as Deities for reverence and devotion,
concentration and growth of the seeker's inner
personality. These gods were involved in those days
through chantings and worship, through rituals and
846
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sacrifices, and therefore, they were the only popular
concepts of God even in the minds of the educated.
Oftentimes and everywhere, "means" have a tendency to
get misunderstood as the very "goal." Arjuna, here in his
true understanding, indicates the Infinite, the Source of all
potentialities, the Lord, as nothing other than Krishna, the
Infinite.
That the Supreme Lord, in fact, expressing through
various functions, Himself plays the part of these Deities,
is an acceptable view from the standpoint of Vedanta. In
our own times it is usual for the devotees to invoke the
Lord and assert that 'the Lord of their heart' is the Lord of
all Lords. To this Lord of all Lords, Arjuna prostrates.
40. Salutations to You, before and behind! Salutations to You
on every side! O All! You, Infinite in Power, and Infinite in
Prowess, pervade all; wherefore You are the All.
The Supreme dwells everywhere within, without, above,
below and around, and there is no place where He is not.
This is not an original idea at all. This has been the
constant state of actual experience of all the great Rishis of
the Upanishads.
The Lord, to whom Arjuna thus mentally prostrates from
all sides, is not only the All-pervading Essence like space
in the Universe, but is also the "womb" from which all
power and daring flow out. Wherever there is an incentive
847
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
to act, or a capacity to achieve, it is all a ray of His infinite
potentiality. The Supreme as Pure Existence dwells
everywhere, in everything and in all beings. Since nothing
can exist without Existence, He, as Pure Existence,
penetrates all, and in fact He alone is the All. Ocean alone
is all the waves; mud alone is all the mud-pots.
I HAVE BEEN A SINNER DUE TO LACK OF 'RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE' OF THY GREATNESS, AND SO VERY
MUCH LIVED FOOLISHLY IN THE PAST. THEREFORE:
41. Whatever I have rashly said from carelessness or love,
addressing You as "O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend," and
regarding You merely as a friend, unknowing of this greatness
of Yours ... ,
42. In whatever way I may have insulted You for the sake of fun,
while at play, reposing or sitting, or at meals, when alone (with
You), O Achyuta, or in company --- that, O Immeasurable One,
I implore You to forgive.
Here are two beautiful stanzas that bring to the forefront
with dramatic precision, the exact type of emotions that
will naturally be generated in any ordinary man, when he
suddenly realises the Glory of the Divine. Till now, Arjuna
had thought Lord Krishna to be nothing more than an
intelligent cowherd boy, whom he had graciously
patronised so long with his royal friendship. And with the
realisation and recognition of Krishna the Infinite, the
848
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mortal in Arjuna prostrates in all loyalty and adoration
and pleads for His Divine mercy and forgiveness.
There is a very intimate personal touch in these two
stanzas wherein the philosophical discussions are
tempered with the emotional touch of deep intimacy. The
very effect of the Geeta is to bring the sonorous truths of
the Vedas and the Upanishads to the happy tune of the
work-a-day world. Great and thought-provoking Vedantic
truths have been suddenly brought down to the easy
familiarity of a drawing-room-chat by such frequent
psychological touches given by Vyasa's masterly pen. As
an intimate friend, Arjuna must have, in rashness, not
knowing Krishna's real Divine Nature, called Him
familiarly by His pet names.
FOR:
43. You are the Father of this world, moving and unmoving.
You are to be adored by this world. You are the greatest GURU,
(for) there exists none who is equal to You; how can there be
then another, superior to You in the three worlds, O Being of
unequalled power?
Here we find that Arjuna, bursting under the pressure of
his voiceless emotion and his great regard for the Lord,
addresses him: "THOU ART THE FATHER OF THE
WHOLE WORLD CONSTITUTED OF THE MOVING
AND THE UNMOVING." No doubt, the three worlds ---
849
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
consisting of our experiences in waking, dream, and deep-
sleep states --- are the interpretations of the same Eternal
from the levels of the gross, the subtle and the causal
bodies, and the Truth that illumines those experiences is
everywhere one and the same.
NATURALLY, THE LORD IS, AS ARJUNA SAYS, "OF
UNEQUALLED GREATNESS," AND THERE IS NONE
"SUPERIOR TO THEE IN THE THREE WORLDS."
BECAUSE IT IS SO:
44. Therefore, bowing down, prostrating my body, I crave your
forgiveness, adorable Lord. As a father forgiveth his son, a friend
his friend, a lover his beloved, even so should You forgive me, O
DEVA.
Arjuna seems to discover in himself a greater eloquence
and a subtler ability to argue logically, with the realisation
that he is in the presence of the Almighty, the Blessed.
Prostration, in Hinduism, though generally practised as a
physical act of touching-the-feet of the revered, is a
significant act that is to be actually accomplished in our
heart as a special inward attitude. Surrendering ourselves,
so that we may rise above ourselves into the spiritual
fields, is true prostration. The ego and ego-centric vagaries
arising out of our false identifications with matter vestures
have robbed us of our experience of the Divinity which is
already in us. To the extent the misconceptions are
annihilated, we, without these over-growths, are sure to
850
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
realise the serener beauty of the Divine, which in reality,
we are. In surrendering the ego unto the Lord, in fact, we
have to bring to His feet nothing but a dirty bundle of
animal vasanas, putrified in our own stupidity and lust!
Naturally, a devotee, reaching the feet of the Lord in a
spirit of surrender and love, has to apologise for the filth
that has been offered, as the only tribute of his love, at His
Divine feet.
Arjuna is pleading here with the Lord to bear with him as
"a father would with his son," as "a friend with his friend,"
as "a lover with his beloved." These three examples bring
within their embrace all the types of immodest crimes that
man, in his ignorance, can perpetrate against his Lord, the
Creator.
ARJUNA NOW PRAYS TO THE LORD TO RESUME HIS
USUAL FORM AND GIVE UP THE TERRIFYING
ASPECTS OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL AND THE
UNIVERSAL:
45. I am delighted, having seen what was never seen before; and
(yet) my mind is distressed with fear. Show me your previous
form only, O God; have mercy, O God of gods, O Abode of the
Universe.
Every devotee falls in love with the Lord of his devotion
and thus when, from the FORM he gets transcended to the
Infinite and Full nature of the FORMLESS, that was
851
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
represented so long by the FORM, he experiences, no
doubt, an Infinite Joy, but at that very moment he is
overtaken by the emotion of "fear." This is the experience
of every seeker during the days of his early attempts at
getting over the evil of spiritual 'ignorance.' The new
realm of joy lived within is, no doubt, absolutely blissful,
but a sudden sense of fear exiles him back to body-
consciousness and the consequent mental agitation.
At the dawn of his experience Divine, the limited ego,
escaping all its limitations, enters into a world unknown
to it so far, and it experiences with all joy the vastness of
its own dynamism. Arjuna expresses his idea when he
says, "I AM DELIGHTED, HAVING SEEN WHAT WAS
UNSEEN BEFORE." But in the earlier attempts, a seeker is
not fit to maintain for long his equilibrium in that Divine
Realm, and his mind seemingly dissolved to enter the
STILL-MOMENT-OF-MEDITATION, revives again to
flutter into activity, and we find, almost always, that it is
the emotion of "fear" that the mind first experiences,
when, with a dreadful shudder it crystallizes itself to sink
into the welter of the body and its demands. At this time,
a devotee identifies himself with his own emotions of love
and devotion and implores the "Lord of his heart" to
manifest His own sportive form of smiles and softness, of
musical words and loving looks.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE FORM IN WHICH ARJUNA
WANTED THE LORD TO APPEAR BEFORE HIM, IS
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING:
852
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
46. I desire to see You as before, crowned, bearing a mace, with a
discus in hand, in Your Former Form only, having four arms, O
Thousand-armed, O Universal Form.
Arjuna makes an open confession here of what he actually
wishes. "I WISH TO SEE YOU AS BEFORE." He is afraid
of the Universal Form into which the Lord has expanded
to express His oneness with the essence in the entire
gross-world of matter.
When the Vedantic concept of Truth is thus experienced or
expressed in its universal majesty and grandeur, few have
the required intellectual stamina to conceive of the
Totality and adore It. Even at moments when the intellect
can handle such an idea, the heart of the devotee will
often fail to tune up its emotion to live the Absolute-
experience for long. From the mental zone, Truth can be
conceived of and enjoyed only through its symbols and
not directly in Its Total-grandeur.
Defining the Form of Vaasudeva in his milder-
manifestation, Arjuna explains in this stanza the
traditional form of Vishnu, the Lord of the Bhagavata. The
concept of God as represented in the phenomena, has
been described in all Puranas, as having four hands. This
may look like a biological freak to students of physiology.
We are apt to forget that they are figurative
representations symbolising the concept of Truth.
853
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The four hands of the God-form represent the four facets
of the "inner-instrument" in man.*
The Lord Himself, the Self who wields these four hands is
represented everywhere as BLUE in colour, and clothed in
YELLOW. The significant hue of BLUE is the colour of the
Infinite, and the measureless always appears as BLUE, just
as the summer-sky or the deep-ocean. YELLOW is the
colour of the earth. Thus the Infinite, clothed in the finite,
playing the game of life through the four "inner-
instruments" is the symbolism behind Lord Vishnu.
It is also interesting to note that the concept of God in
every religion is the same inasmuch as He is the Supreme-
most with every power and all knowledge. Man achieves
things by the strength of His hands, and the Lord, who is
all-powerful, can therefore be symbolised only by
showing that He has four hands. The four symbolical
instruments which the Lord is represented to carry in His
four hands are the club, the discus, the conch and the
lotus. The call of the Divine comes to everyone's bosom,
when He blows His CONCH, and if man were not to
listen to the call of the Higher dictates in himself, the
CLUB follows to punch him, and in spite of that, if man
continues his own mistakes, the DISCUS chops him down.
In case the roar of the "conch" is obeyed implicitly, then he
gains the LOTUS, a flower that represents, in Hinduism,
what the white-dove and the poppy-flower stand for in
Western tradition. Peace and prosperity are the
854
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
significance of "lotus" in India. Lotus signifies
PERFECTION SPIRITUAL.
Arjuna, in short, wants the Lord to appear in his serener-
Form and quieter-Attitude. For all early seekers and new
initiates in Vedanta, it naturally becomes difficult to keep,
in themselves, the same tempo for their philosophical
pursuits. At such moments of dissipation and drowsiness
of the intellect, the aspiring heart must discover some
reposeful resting-place wherein it can revive itself. This
bed-of-peace and tranquility, upon which the inner
personality of man can revive and grow into its fuller
stature, is the glorious Form of the Lord.
SEEING ARJUNA AFRAID, THE LORD WITHDREW HIS
UNIVERSAL FORM; AND CONSOLING ARJUNA WITH
HIS SWEET WORDS, HE SAID:
The Blessed Lord said: 47. Graciously by Me, O Arjuna, this
Supreme-Form has been shown to you by My own YOGA-
power --- Full of splendour, Primeval, Infinite, this Universal-
Form of Mine has never been seen by any other than yourself .
Here we have the confession that it is not the privilege of
all devotees to come to perceive this "Form-tremendous"
and that Arjuna is enjoying It as a special favour due to
His Infinite Grace. He also asserts that, "THIS SPLENDID,
PRIMEVAL, INFINITE, UNIVERSAL-FORM OF MINE"
has not been seen by anyone else.
855
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It does not mean that Vyasa, the author of the Geeta, is
propounding a new theory, and is making the Lord of his
own creation testify to the veracity of it. It only means that
this intellectual realisation of the Universal-Oneness has
not been gained by anyone placed in the same
circumstances as those of Arjuna in the war-front.
Mentally shattered, physically worn-out, emotionally
upset --- the miserable condition of Arjuna and this
Arjuna-state of utter despondency are, in fact, far removed
from the favourable conditions for a single-pointed
intellectual quest, without which the underlying Principle
of Oneness in the multiplicity of the gross world, cannot
easily be comprehended. But Krishna had, due to his
tremendous powers, given the required 'eye-of-wisdom'
to Arjuna and made him realise, in a chance moment of
mental pause, the vision of the Cosmic Form.
WHAT WAS AT THE BACK OF THE MIND OF THE
LORD, WHEN HE EXPRESSED THIS STANZA, IS
CLEAR FROM THE FOLLOWING:
48. Neither by the study of the VEDAS and sacrifices, nor by
rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this form in
the world of men by any other than yourself, O great hero
among the Kurus.
Explaining why Arjuna deserves a special congratulation
for having gained this extraordinary experience, the Lord
says that none can 'SEE' this Universal-Form merely
856
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
because of one's study of the Vedas, or on the strength of
one's sacrifices. Nor can one gain it by the merits gained
through the distribution of gifts, or through performing
rituals, or even through constant practice of severe
austerities. These are, no doubt, necessary and always
helpful in preparing the seeker to realise the essential
unity beneath the perceived plurality, but neither a mere
book-study, nor empty ritualism, nor physical tapas in
themselves will, as an effect of them, bring about this
understanding and the Final Experience. It can come only
when the mind is steady. This "Vision" can be illumined
only in the clear light of an integrated 'in-turned intellect.'
In thus making light of the study of the Vedas,
performance of sacrifices, distribution of gifts, practice of
rituals and a life of grim penance, Lord Krishna should
not be misunderstood as ridiculing these great
prescriptions of the Vedas. He merely means to say that
although these are means, preparatory to the final end,
they are not to be confused with the goal. Cooking, in
itself, cannot appease hunger, but that does not mean that
cooking is unnecessary; after cooking there is, and must
be, the eating. It is in this sense that we must understand
the stanza, criticising ponderous study and futile efforts of
misguided enthusiasts.
FOR, NONE OF THE KNOWN METHODS OF SELF-
DEVELOPMENT IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING THIS
GLORIOUS ACHIEVEMENT. IT IS SAID:
857
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
49. Be not afraid, nor bewildered on seeing such a terrible-Form
of Mine as this; with your fear dispelled and with gladdened
heart, now behold again this Form of Mine.
Vyasa's dramatic genius will not fail to seek its fulfilment
whenever an occasion arises. Here is an artistic example of
such fine brush-work, accomplished by Vyasa with words,
on the canvas of the Geeta. Arjuna's emotional agitations
are dramatically indicated here when the Lord says, "BE
NOT AFRAID, NOR BEWILDERED, HAVING SEEN
THIS FORM OF MINE, SO TERRIBLE."
Krishna consoles his friend Arjuna by words and actions
and helps him to be in a state of reassuring joys. The Lord
comes back to His original form and announces His entry
into it with the words: "NOW SEE AGAIN THIS, MY
FORMER-FORM."
This passage, which announces the return of the Lord into
His "gentler attitude" and "loving form," should remind all
Vedantic students of at least one of the great Mahavakyas.
The identity between the Universal-Form, the Terrible-
Totality and the gentle Form-of-Krishna, the Divine-
individual, is beautifully brought about by the term
"THIS MY FORMER-FORM." In fact, the microcosmic
representation of Truth smiling temporarily from an
assumed mortal-form of Krishna, is Itself the macrocosmic
Universal-Form, wherein He expresses Himself as the
858
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Essence in all forms and names. The wave is in essence,
the ocean; and if the ocean is mighty and fierce, terrible
and gigantic, the wave itself is tame and bashful, lovable
and attractive.
THE SCENE AGAIN SHIFTS FROM KURUKSHETRA
AND THE WAR-FRONT TO THE QUIET CHAMBERS
OF THE LUXURIOUS PALACE IN HASTINAPURA,
WHERE THE BLIND OLD DHRITARASHTRA IS
LISTENING TO THE RUNNING COMMENTARY
GIVEN BY HIS MINISTER, SANJAYA:
Sanjaya said: 50. Having thus spoken to Arjuna, Vaasudeva
again showed His own Form, and, the Great-souled One,
assuming His gentle Form, consoled him who was so terrified.
Sanjaya confirms here to the blind old king that the
terrible Universal-Form, after announcing Its intentions of
coming back again to its original sweet form had actually
accomplished that promise. What form Krishna re-entered
is evident: "THE VERY FORM IN WHICH HE WAS
BORN IN THE HOUSE OF VASUDEVA."* He assumed
the pleasant shape of Lord Krishna, the familiar friend of
Arjuna, the Blue-Boy of the Gopikas, and thus consoled the
mighty warrior, who was aghast with wonder, and
trembling with "fear."
In these words of Sanjaya, we also can notice the
minister's anxiety that Emperor Dhritarashtra should see
859
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the suggestion that the Lord of the Universe is Krishna,
and that Krishna is on the side of the Pandavas. But how
... how will a blind man ever see?
THE SCENE AGAIN SHIFTS TO THE WAR-FRONT
WHEN SANJAYA REPORTS THE WORDS OF ARJUNA
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
Arjuna said: 51. Having seen this, Thy gentle human-Form, O
Janardana, I am now composed and restored to my own nature.
Arjuna admits here that, when he sees the normal and the
gentle-Form of Lord Krishna, he feels relieved from his
inner tensions and agitations. When an unprepared
student like Arjuna is suddenly pushed forward on the
spiritual ladder and made to experience truths that are
transcendental, and too vast for his intellectual
comprehension, it is natural that even in that Realm-of-
Bliss, he feels giddy confusions and heaving sobs. Arjuna
admits: "I have now become collected in mind and am
restored to my normal nature, having seen the milder
aspect of Krishna's gracious human form."
TRUE DEVOTION TO THE UNIVERSAL FORM IS
EXPLAINED HEREUNDER:
860
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 52. Very hard, indeed, it is to see this
Form of Mine which you have seen. Even the gods are ever
longing to behold this Form.
53. Neither by the VEDAS, nor by austerity, nor by gift, nor by
sacrifices can I be seen in this Form as you have seen Me (in
your present mental condition).
The Universal-Form of the Lord is no easy experience for
anyone, and it can be gained neither by study of the Vedas,
nor by austerities, nor by gifts, nor by a sacrifice. Even the
gods, the denizens of heaven, with their ampler intellects,
longer lives, and harder endeavours, are unable to behold
this Universal-Form, and they keep on longing for this
experience.
And yet, Krishna has shown this Form, mighty and
wondrous, to His friend through His Grace, as He Himself
admitted earlier.*
We may wonder what makes the Lord shower His grace
upon one, and not upon another. It CANNOT be a
haphazard distribution of an Omnipotent, who does
things as He likes, arbitrarily, without any rhyme or
reason! For, in that case the Lord will be accused of
partiality and arbitrariness.
HERE, IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA, WE GET THE
SCIENTIFIC EXPLANATION OF WHAT COMPELS THE
LORD TO SHOWER HIS SPECIAL FAVOURS UPON
861
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SOMEONE SOMETIMES, AND NOT UPON ALL AT
ALL TIMES:
54. But, by single-minded devotion, can I, of this Form, be
'known' and 'seen' in reality, and also 'entered' into, O
Parantapa (O scorcher of your foes)!
Regarding devotion Shankara says: "No doubt, of the
means available for liberating ourselves, the most
substantial hardware is Bhakti; and identifying ourselves
with the Self is called Bhakti."
Identification is the truest measure of Love. The devotee,
forgetting his own individual existence and, in his love,
identifying to become one with his beloved Lord, is the
culmination of Divine Love. The Vedantic student who is
the seeker of the Self, is spiritually obliged to renounced
all his abject identification with his matter vestures and to
discover his true nature to be the Self.
Only those who are thus capable of identifying themselves
with the One unifying Truth that holds together, in its
web-of-love, the plurality, can experience, "ME IN THIS
FASHION" --- in my Cosmic Form.
The three stages in which realisation of Truth comes to
man are indicated here when the Lord says, "TO KNOW,
TO SEE, AND TO ENTER." A definite intellectual
knowledge of the goal and the path is the beginning of a
862
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seeker's pilgrimage --- TO KNOW. Next comes the
seeker's attempt to masticate the ideas intellectually
understood through his own personal reflections upon the
information which he has already gathered --- TO SEE.
Having thus 'known' and 'seen' the goal, thereafter, the
seeker, through a process of detachment from the false
and attachment to the Real, comes to experience the Truth
as no object other than himself --- TO ENTER. By the term
'entering,' it is also indicated that the fulfilled seeker
becomes the very essence of the sought. The dreamer,
suffering from the sorrows of the dream, ends it all, when
he no more sees, but "enters" the waking-state, himself to
become the waker.
HOW? ... I SHALL EXPLAIN, SAYS THE LORD AND
ADDS:
55. He who does actions for Me, who looks upon Me as the
Supreme, who is devoted to Me, who is free from attachment,
who bears enmity towards none, he comes to Me, O Pandava.
When he heard that anyone can, through undivided
devotion, not only recognise the cosmic might of the Lord
but also experience that glory in himself, the Pandava
Prince's face must have reflected an anxiety to acquire this
status. As an answer to this unasked question from
Arjuna, Krishna explains here how one can grow towards
this great fulfilment in life.
863
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Krishna-plan, for finite man to gain the stature and
strength of the Cosmic, seems to consist of five distinct
schemes. This is clear from the conditions required of a
seeker as given in this verse. They are: (1) whose work is
all dedicated to the Lord, (2) whose goal is the Lord, (3)
who is a devotee of the Lord, (4) who is free from all
attachments, and (5) who is devoid of all sense of enmity
towards everyone.
In these five schemes, we find the entire line of self-
discipline summarised. Detachment from all activities,
whether physical or mental or intellectual can take place
only when one is constantly thinking of the Self. Enmity is
possible only when one considers the other as separate
from oneself. There cannot be enmity between my own
right hand and my left hand. The awareness of the
Oneness should be experienced through the vision of the
same Self everywhere and then alone can the total
avoidance of enmity with any creature be fully
accomplished.
Total detachment is an impossibility at the mind-and-
intellect level. The mind and intellect cannot live without
attaching themselves to some thing or being. Therefore,
the seeker, through God-dedicated activity, learns first to
withdraw all his attachments from other things, and then
to turn his mind with the fervour of devoted attachment
to the Lord. In accomplishing this, all the schemes
explained earlier are, indeed, very helpful.
864
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, when the whole scheme is re-evaluated, we can find
in it a logic quite acceptable and perfectly psychological.
Each subsequent item in the scheme is beautifully
supported and nourished by the previous one. From the
stanza, it is evident that the spiritual seeker's great
pilgrimage starts with God-dedicated activities. Soon, that
God-principle Itself becomes his very goal in life. He will
develop, in himself, a consummate liking for this glorious
goal. Naturally, all his other finite attachments with the
world-of-objects will end, and at last, he will come to
contact the Self. Having become the Self, he recognises
himself everywhere, in everything, and so, in him there
cannot be any sense of enmity at all.
LOVE FOR ALL AND HATRED FOR NONE can be
considered the Geeta 'touch-stone' to know the quality of
realisation and intensity of experience a seeker has gained
through his Sadhana.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eleventh
discourse ends titled: THE YOGA OF THE VISION OF THE
UNIVERSAL FORM
The Chapter is rightly named as the vision of the
Universal-Form. In Sanskrit scriptural terminology, it is
pointed out that the term Vishwa Roopa used here is
actually the Virata Roopa. The Self, identifying itself with
an 'individual physical body,' experiences the waking-
865
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
state happenings, and in this condition the Self is called in
Vedanta as Vishwa. When the same Self identifies Itself
with the total-physical-gross-bodies of the Universe, in
that condition the Self is called the Cosmic-Virata. Here
the Lord showed His Cosmic-Form but the Chapter is
titled as Vishwa-Roopa.
Om Om Om Om Om
866
