Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
study of the entire Song, we shall try to see how Krishna
indicates the same truth from different angles of vision
and explains it in different words.
Chapter 1
Arjuna Vishada Yoga
The Yoga of Despondency of Arjuna
Dhritarashtra said: 1. What did the sons of Pandu and also my
people do when, desirous to fight, they assembled together on the
holy plain of Kurukshetra, O Sanjaya?
In the entire Geeta this is the only verse which the blind
old king Dhritarashtra gives out. All the rest of the seven
hundred stanzas are Sanjaya's report on what happened
on the Kurukshetra battle-field, just before the war.
The blind old king is certainly conscious of the palpable
injustices that he had done to his nephews, the Pandavas.
Dhritarashtra knew the relative strength of the two
armies, and therefore, was fully confident of the larger
strength of his son's army. And yet, the viciousness of his
past and the consciousness of the crimes perpetrated seem
to be weighing heavily upon the heart of the blind king,
and so he has his own doubts on the outcome of this war.
13
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
He asks Sanjaya to explain to him what is happening on
the battle-field of Kurukshetra. Vyasa had given Sanjaya
the powers to see and listen to the happenings in far-off
Kurukshetra even while he was sitting beside
Dhritarashtra in the palace at Hastinapura.
Sanjaya said: 2. Having seen the army of the Pandavas drawn
up in battle array, King Duryodhana then approached his
teacher (Drona) and spoke these words.
From this stanza onwards, we have the report of Sanjaya
upon what he saw and heard on the war-front at
Kurukshetra. When Duryodhana saw the Pandava-forces
arrayed for battle, though they were less in number than
his own forces, yet the tyrant felt his self-confidence
draining away. As a child would run to its parents in
fright, so too Duryodhana, unsettled in his mind, runs to
his teacher, Dronacharya. When our motives are impure
and our cause unjust, however well-equipped we may be,
our minds should necessarily feel restless and agitated.
This is the mental condition of all tyrants and lusty
dictators.
3. Behold, O Teacher! this mighty army of the sons of Pandu,
arrayed by the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple.
It is indeed stupid of Duryodhana to point out to Drona
the army formation of the Pandavas. Later on also we
14
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
shall find Duryodhana talking too much and that is a
perfect symptom indicating the inward fears of the great
king over the final outcome of the unjust war.
4. Here are heroes, mighty archers, equal in battle to Bhima and
Arjuna, Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada, each commanding
eleven-thousand archers.
5. Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, and the valiant king of Kashi,
Purujit and Kuntibhoja and Saibya, the best of men.
6. The strong Yudhamanyu and the brave Uttamaujas, the son
of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi, all of them, divisional
commanders.
In these three stanzas, we have a list of names of all those
who were noted personalities in the Pandava army.
Duryodhana, reviewing his enemies standing in
formation, recognises very many noted men of war
functioning as maharathas in the Pandava forces. A
maharathi was in charge of a group of 11, 000 archers,
which formed a division in the ancient Hindu army.
Arjuna and Bhima were accepted men of war, noted for
archery and strength. These enumerated heroes were, says
Duryodhana, each as great as Arjuna and Bhima, the
implication being that though the Pandava forces were
less in number, their total effectiveness was much greater
than that of the larger and better equipped army of the
Kauravas.
15
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
7. Know also, O best among the twice-born, the names of those
who are the most distinguished amongst ourselves, the leaders of
my army; these I name to thee for thy information.
Addressing his master as "the best among the twice-born,"
Duryodhana now repeats the names of the distinguished
heroes in his own army. A weak man, to escape from his
own mental fears, will whistle to himself in the dark. The
guilty conscience of the tyrant king had undermined all
his mental strength. The more he realised the combined
strength of the great personalities arrayed in the opposite
enemy camp, the more abjectly nervous he felt, in spite of
the fact that his own army was also manned by highly
competent heroes. In order to revive himself, he wanted to
hear words of encouragement from his teachers and
elders. But when Duryodhana met Drona, the acharya
chose to remain silent and the helpless king had to find for
himself new means of encourgement to revive his own
drooping enthusiasm. Therefore, he started enumerating
the great leaders in his own army.
When a person has thus completely lost his morale due to
the heavy burden of his own crimes weighing on his
conscience, it is but natural that he loses all sense of
proportion in his words. At such moments of high tension
an individual clearly exhibits his true mental culture. He
addresses his own teacher as "the best among the twice-
born."
16
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A Brahmana is considered as "twice-born" because of his
inner spiritual development. When born from his mother's
womb man comes into the world only as the animal called
man. Thereafter, through study and contemplation he
gains more and more discipline, and a cultured Hindu is
called a Brahmana (Brahmin).
After all, Drona is a Brahmana by birth and as such he
must have a greater share of softness of heart. Moreover,
the enemy lines are fully manned by his own dear
students. As a shrewd dictator, Duryodhana entertained
shameless doubts about the loyalty of his own teacher.
This is but an instinctive fear which is natural with all men
of foul motives and crooked dealings. When we are not
ourselves pure, we will project our own weaknesses and
impurities on others who are working around us as our
subordinates.
8. Yourself and Bishma, and Karna and also Kripa, the
victorious in war; Aswatthama, Vikarna and so also the son of
Somadatta.
Though Duryodhana, in his mental hysteria, got slightly
upset at the subjective onslaught of his own brutal
motives and past crimes, like the true dictator that he was,
he regained his balance in no time. The moment he had
spilt out in his insulting arrogance, the term "twice-born"
in addressing his teacher, he realised that he had over-
17
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stepped the bounds of discretion. Perhaps the cold silence
of the revered acharya spoke amply to Duryodhana.
9. And many other heroes also who are determined to give up
their lives for my sake, armed with various weapons and
missiles, all well-skilled in battle.
The incorrigible vanity of the dictatorial tyrant is amply
clear when he arrogates to himself the stupendous honour
that such a vast array of heroes had come ready to lay
down their lives for "MY SAKE." To all careful students of
the Mahabharata, it cannot be very difficult to estimate how
many of these great veterans would have thrown in their
lot with Duryodhana, had it not been for the fact that
Bhishma --- the grandsire --- was fighting in the ranks of
the Kauravas.
10. This army of ours defended by Bhishma is insufficient,
whereas that army of theirs defended by Bhima is sufficient. Or,
This army of ours protected by Bhishma is unlimited, whereas
that army of theirs protected by Bhima is limited.
In the art of warfare, then known among the ancient
Hindus, each army had, no doubt, a commander-in-chief,
but it also had a powerful man of valour, courage and
intelligence, who functioned as the "defender." In the
Kaurava forces, Bhishma officiated as the "defender," and
in the Pandava forces Bhima held the office.
18
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
11. Therefore do you all, stationed in your respective positions
in the several divisions of the army, protect Bhishma alone.
After thus expressing in a soliloquy, his own estimate of
the relative strength and merit of the two forces, now
arrayed, ready for a total war, the king in Duryodhana
rises above his mental clouds of desperation to shoot forth
his imperial orders to his army officers. He advises them
that each commander must keep to his position and fight
in disciplined order, and all of them should spare no pains
to see that the revered Bhishma is well-protected. Perhaps,
Duryodhana suspects that the lusty force that he had
mobilised is an ill-assorted heterogeneous army
constituted of the various tribal chieftains and kings of
distant lands and that the strength of such an army could
be assured, only when they hold on to a united strategy in
all their various manoeuvres. Synchronisation of the
different operations is the very backbone of an army's
success, and in order to bring this about, as a true
strategist, Duryodhana is instructing his various
commanders working in their different wings to work out
the single policy of protecting Bhishma.
12. His glorious grandsire (Bhishma) , the oldest of the
Kauravas, in order to cheer Duryodhana, now sounded aloud a
lion's roar and blew his conch.
19
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
All the while that Duryodhana was busy making a fool of
himself and in his excitement putting all the great officers
of his army into an uncomfortable mood of desperate
unhappiness, Bhishma was standing, not too far away,
observing the pitiable confusions of the tyrant. The
revered grandsire noticed, intelligently, in Dronacharya's
silence, the outraged temper of a man of knowledge and
action. He realised that the situation could be saved only if
all those assembled were jerked out of their mental
preoccupations. The more they were let alone with their
revolting thoughts against Duryodhana, the more they
would become ineffectual for the imminent battle.
Understanding this psychology of the officers under his
command, the great Marshall Bhishma took up his war-
bugle (conch) and blew it, sending forth roaring waves of
confidence into the hearts of the people manning the
array.
This action of Bhishma, though performed by him out of
pity for Duryodhana's mental condition; amounted to an
act of aggression almost corresponding to the 'first-bullet-
shot' in modern warfare. With this lion-roar, the
Mahabharata war was actually started, and for all historical
purposes the Kauravas had thereby become the
aggressors.
13. Then (following Bhishma) , conches and kettle-drums,
tabors, drums and cow-horns blared forth quite suddenly and
the sound was tremendous.
20
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
All the commanders were no doubt in high tension, and as
soon as they heard the marshall's bugle, individually, each
one of them took up his instrument and sounded the
battle-cry. Thus, conches and kettle-drums, tabors and
trumpets, bugles and cow-horns, all burst forth into a
challenging war-call, which Sanjaya, half-heartedly,
describes as "tremendous." Later on, we shall find that
when this challenge was replied to by the Pandavas, the
sound was described by Sanjaya as "terrific," "resounding
throughout heaven and earth, and rending the hearts of
the Kauravas." Here is another instance to prove that
Sanjaya was, evidently, a moral objector to the war-aim of
Duryodhana. Therefore, we have in him a most
sympathetic reporter of the message of the Lord at the
battle-front, as given out in His Song Divine.
14. Then, also Madhava and the son of Pandu, seated in their
magnificent chariot yoked with white horses, blew their divine
conches.
The wealth of detail that has been so lavishly squandered
in expressing a simple fact that, from the Pandava-side,
Krishna and Arjuna answered the battle-cry, clearly shows
where Sanjaya's sympathies lay. Here, the description ---
"sitting in the magnificent chariot, harnessed with white
horses, Madhava and Arjuna blew their conches divine" --
- clearly echoes the hope lurking in the heart of Sanjaya
that due to the apparent contrast in the two descriptions,
21
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perhaps, even at this moment Dhritarashtra may be
persuaded to withdraw his sons from the warfront.
15. Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya and Dhananjaya
(Arjuna) blew the Devadatta and Vrikodara (Bhima) , the doer
of terrible deeds, blew the great conch, named Paundra.
In his description of the Pandava array, Sanjaya is very
particular to mention even the name of each warrior's
special conch. Panchajanya was blown by Krishna.
Hrishikesha is the name of the Lord and it has often been
described as meaning the 'Lord of the Senses.' But this is
according to an old derivation: Hrishika+ Isha = "Lord of
the Senses." But the word "Hrishika" is an obscure one.
Modern commentators prefer to explain it as Hrish+ kesha
"Having short hair."
16. King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew the Anantavijaya;
Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosha and the
Manipushpaka.
17. The king of Kashi, an excellent archer, Shikhandi, the
mighty commander of eleven thousand archers, Dhristadyumna
and Virata and Satyaki, the unconquered;
22
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
18. Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of the Earth, and
the son of Subhadra, the mighty armed, blew their respective
conches.
In the above verses we have the enumeration of the great
Maharathas, battalion-commanders, who, with enthusiasm,
loudly blew their conches, again and again, in an
ascending cadence. The arrow that ultimately felled
Bhishma in the Mahabharata-war came from Shikhandi. The
charioteer of Krishna, who was also a battalion-
commander in the Pandava army, was called Satyaki.
The report is being addressed to Dhritarashtra and it is
indicated by Sanjaya's words, "Oh Lord of the earth."
19. That tumultuous sound rent the hearts of (the people of)
Dhritarashtra's party and made both heaven and earth
reverberate.
From the fourteenth stanza onwards Sanjaya gives us in
all detail an exhaustive description of the Pandava forces,
and he spares no pains to bring into the mind of
Dhritarashtra a vivid understanding of the superiority of
the Pandava forces. Perhaps, the minister hopes that his
blind king will realise the disastrous end and, at least
now, will send forth a command to stop the fratricidal
war.
23
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
20-21. Then, seeing the people of Dhritarashtra's party standing
arrayed and the discharge of weapons about to begin, Arjuna,
the son of Pandu, whose ensign was a monkey, took up his bow
and said these words to Krishna (Hrishikesha) , O Lord of the
Earth!
In these one and a half verses we have a description of the
arrival of the hero of the Mahabharata war, Arjuna, on the
battle-field. The exact time and nature of his entry are
noted here. The shooting had not yet started, but it was
imminent. It was the most tense moment; the crisis had
risen to its highest pitch. It was at this moment that
Arjuna, whose ensign was that of Hanuman, said the
following words to Lord Krishna.
In those ancient days of chivalrous warfare, each
honoured hero had his own personal flag, carrying on it
conspicuously, a well-recognised symbol. By the flag
flying on the chariot, the enemy could recognise who was
the occupant of the chariot. A hero was not generally short
at by an ordinary soldier, but each fought with his equal
on the battle-field. This system of carrying a symbol to
recognize individuals in the battle-field is faithfully
followed even in modern warfare. A high official's vehicle
carries insignia of the officer's rank on its very number-
plate; on the very uniform enough details are pinned on to
recognize the wearer and identify him. Arjuna's ensign
was that of a monkey.
24
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The stanza also gives us, in hasty strokes, the information
that Arjuna was impatient to start the righteous war. He
had raised his instrument of war, his bow, indicating his
readiness to fight.
Arjuna said: 21-22. In the midst of the two armies, place my
chariot, O Achyuta, that I may behold those who stand here
desirous of fighting and, on the eve of this battle, let me know
with whom I must fight.
Here, we hear Arjuna's soldier-like command to his
charioteer to drive and place the vehicle between the two
armies so that he might see and recognise the various
heroes whom he has to meet and fight in the great war. In
expressing thus a wish to review the enemy lines the great
hero is showing his daring and chivalry, his great courage
and firm determination, his adventurous readiness and
indomitable energy. Upto this point in the story, Arjuna,
the invincible hero of the Mahabharata, was in his own true
element unaffected by any mental hysteria.
23. For I desire to observe those who are assembled here for the
fight, wishing to please in battle, the evil-minded sons of
Dhritarashtra.
The verse only reinforces our impression of Arjuna
gathered in the previous lines. He is giving the reason
why he wants to review the enemy lines. As a man of
action, he did not want to take any undue risk and so
wanted to see for himself who were the low-minded,
25
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
power-mad, greed-ridden men who had joined the forces
of the Kauravas, supporting the palpably tyrannical and
evidently unjust cause of the unscrupulous Duryodhana.
As we read the stanza, we can almost hear the great
warrior's teeth grinding, as he spits out these hot words
which express his mental estimate of his relentless
cousins.
Sanjaya said: 24. Thus addressed by Gudakesha, O Bharata,
Hrishikesha, having stationed the best of chariots between the
two armies;
25. In front of Bhishma and Drona, and all the rulers of the
earth, he said, 'O Partha, behold these Kurus gathered together.
'
At a point "facing Bhishma, Drona and all the rulers of the
earth," the Divine Charioteer pulled up the reins and
brought the royal chariot to a halt. As a dutiful driver,
Krishna says to Arjuna, "Behold, O Partha! All the
Kauravas gathered together." These are the only words
that Krishna has spoken in the entire first chapter; and
these represent the sparks that set fire to and brought
down the egoistic edifice of false valuations which the
great hero had built for himself as a splendid dwelling
place for his personality. Hereafter, we shall find how
Arjuna reacted to this great challenge and ultimately got
his entire "within" wrecked and shattered.
26
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Partha means 'Son of Pritha' --- it is a name of Arjuna;
'Pritha' was another name of Kunti; the Sanskrit term
Partha also carries a flavour of the term Parthiva meaning
'clay-made,' 'earth-formed.' The suggestive implication of
this term is very striking inasmuch as it connotes that the
Geeta is the Song of Truth sung by the Immortal to the
mortal Arjuna, man's all-time representative.
26. Then Partha saw stationed there in both the armies, fathers,
grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,
grandsons and friends too.
27. (He saw) Fathers-in-law and friends also in both the armies.
Then the son of Kunti, seeing all these kinsmen thus standing
arrayed, spoke thus sorrowfully, filled with deep pity.
Thus shown by Shri Krishna, Arjuna recognised in his
enemy lines all his kith and kin, near and dear family
members, brothers and cousins, teachers and grandsires,
and almost all his acquaintances and friends. He
recognized such intimate relations not only in the enemy
lines, but even in his own army. This sight, perhaps,
brought to his mind, for the first time, the full realisation
of the tragedies of a fratricidal war. As a warrior and a
man of action, he did not, perhaps till then, fully realize
the extent of sacrifice that society would be called upon to
make in order that his ambition might be fulfilled and
Duryodhana's cruelties avenged.
27
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Whatever might have been the cause, the sight brought
into his mind a flood of pity and compassion.
Evidently, this was not an honest emotion. Had it been
honest, had his pity and compassion been, Buddha-like,
natural and instinctive, he would have, even long before
the war, behaved quite differently. This emotion which
now Sanjaya glorifies as "pity" in Arjuna, is a misnomer.
In the human heart, there is always a great tendency to
glorify one's own weaknesses with some convenient
angelic name and divine pose. Thus, a rich man's vanity is
misnamed as charity when he builds a temple in his own
name with the secret aim of immortalising himself. Here
also we find that the feeling of desperation that came in
Arjuna's mind due to the complete shattering of his
mental equilibrium has been misnamed and glorified as
'pity'.
Arjuna had a long life of mental repressions which had
created an infinite amount of dynamic energies seeking a
field for expression. His mind got split up because of his
egoistic evaluation of himself as the greatest hero of his
time, and because of his anxious desire for a victorious
end of the war. The preoccupation of his mind, dreaming
intensively, about the ultimate end of the war brought
about a complete divorce between the 'subjective' and the
'objective' aspects of his mind.
Later on, in this chapter, we shall discover the various
symptoms of this neurotic condition in him and his
28
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
hysterical blabberings which are typical of such a mental
patient. The endeavour in Chapter I of the Geeta is to give
the complete "case-history" of a patient suffering from the
typical "Arjuna-disease." The Bhagawad Geeta gives, as I
said earlier, an extremely efficient "Krishna-cure" for this
soul-killing "Arjuna-disease."
Arjuna said: 28. Seeing these my kinsmen, O Krishna, arrayed,
eager to fight,
29. My limbs fail and my mouth is parched, my body quivers
and my hair stands on end.
In these two stanzas, there is an exhaustive enumeration
of the symptoms that the patient could then recognise in
his own physical body as a result of his mental confusions.
That which Sanjaya had glorified as 'pity', when coming
out of Arjuna's own mouth, gains a more realistic
expression. Arjuna says: "seeing my kinsmen gathered
here anxiously determined to fight, my limbs shiver"...,
etc.
All these symptoms are described in the text-books of
modern psychology as typical symptoms of the mental
disease named 'anxiety-state-neurosis.'
30. The Gandiva-bow slips from my hand, and my skin burns all
over; I am also unable to stand and my mind is whirling round,
as it were.
29
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here Arjuna is adding some more details of the symptoms
of his disease. Earlier we had a list of symptoms that
manifested on the physical body. Now in this stanza,
Arjuna tries to report recognised symptoms of the mal-
adjustments at his mental level.
Not only is his mind unsteady, agitated and chaotic, but it
has lost all its morale. It has come down to the stupid level
of accepting and recognising superstitious omens
portending disastrous failures and imminent
consequences.
NOT ONLY DOES THE FOLLOWING STANZA
VIVIDLY PICTURE TO US HIS MENTAL CONFUSIONS,
BUT IT ALSO SHOWS HOW FAR HIS
DISCRIMINATION HAS BEEN DRAINED OFF, AND
HIS MORALE DESTROYED.
31. And I see adverse omens, O Keshava. Nor do I see any good
in killing my kinsmen in battle.
In this state of mental confusion, when his emotions have
been totally divorced from his intellect, the 'objective-
mind,' without the guidance of its 'subjective-aspect,' runs
wild and comes to some unintelligent conclusions. He
says, 'I desire neither victory, nor empire, nor even
pleasure.' It is a recognised fact that a patient of hysteria,
when allowed to talk, will, in a negative way, express the
very cause for the attack. For example, when a woman,
hysterically raving, repeatedly declares with all emphasis,
30
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that she is not tired of her husband that she still respects
him, that he still loves her, that there is no rupture
between them, etc., she, by these very words, clearly
indicates the exact cause of her mental chaos.
Similarly, the very denials of Arjuna clearly indicate to all
careful readers how and why he got into such a state of
mental grief. He desired victory. He urgently wanted the
kingdom. He anxiously expected to win pleasures for
himself and his relations. But the challenging look of the
mighty Kaurava forces and the great and eminent
warriors standing ready to fight, shattered his hopes,
blasted his ambitions, and undermined his self-confidence
and he slowly developed the well-known "Arjuna-
disease," the cure for which is the theme of the Geeta.
32. For, I desire not victory, O Krishna, nor kingdom, nor
pleasures. Of what avail is dominion to us, O Govinda? Of
what avail are pleasures or even life itself?
33. They for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyment and
pleasures stand here in battle, having renounced life and wealth.
34. Teachers, fathers, sons and also grandfathers, maternal
uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other
relatives.
Arjuna continues his arguments to Krishna against the
advisability of such a civil war between the two factions of
31
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the same royal family. A Dharma-hunting Arjuna is here
mentally manufacturing a case for himself justifying his
cowardly retreat from the post of duty where destiny has
called upon him to act.
He repeats what he had said earlier because Krishna, with
his pregnant silence, is criticising Arjuna's attitude. The
provocatively smiling lips of the Lord are whipping
Arjuna into a sense of shame. He wants the moral support
of his friend and charioteer to come to the conclusion that
what he is feeling in his own mind is acceptable and just.
But the endorsement and the intellectual sanction are not
forthcoming from either the look of Krishna or the Lord's
words.
35. These I do not wish to kill, though they kill me, O
Madhusudana, even for the sake of dominion over the three
worlds; how much less for the sake of the earth.
Feeling that he had not expressed his case strongly
enough to Krishna to make him come to this conclusion,
and, assuming that it was because of this that the Lord
had not given his assent to it, Arjuna decided to declare
with a mock spirit of renunciation, that he had so much
large-heartedness in him that he would not kill his
cousins, even if they were to kill him. The climax came
when Arjuna, with quixotic exaggeration, declared that he
would not fight the war, even if he were to win all the
32
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
three worlds of the universe, much less so for the mere
Hastinapura-kingship.
36. Killing these sons of Dhritarashtra, what pleasure can be
ours, O Janardana? Sin alone will be our gain by killing these
felons.
In spite of all that Arjuna said so far, Krishna is as silent as
a sphinx. Therefore, Arjuna gives up his melodramatic
expression and assumes a softer, a more appealing tone
and takes the attitude of explaining in vain, a serious
matter to a dull-witted friend. The change of strategy
becomes conspicuously ludicrous when we notice
Krishna's continued silence!!
In the first line of the stanza he explains to Krishna that no
good can arise out of killing the sons of Dhritarashtra...
still the wooden-smile of Krishna does not change and the
Pandava hero, his intelligence shattered, tries to find a
cause for Krishna's attitude. Immediately, he remembers
that the Kaurava brothers were behaving towards the
Pandavas as felons. 'Atatayinah' means felons, who
deserve to be killed according to the Artha Shastra.
Sin is only a mistake committed by a misunderstood
individual ego against its own Divine Nature as the
Eternal Soul. To act as the body or the mind or the intellect
is not to act up to the responsibilities of a man but it
becomes an attempt to behave under the impulses of an
33
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
animal. All those acts performed and motives entertained,
which create grosser mental impressions and thereby
build stronger walls between us and our cognition of the
Real Divine Spark in ourselves are called sins.
Arjuna's seemingly learned objection to killing enemies is
a misinterpretation of our sacred texts (Shastra), and to
have acted upon it would have been suicidal to our very
culture. Therefore, Krishna refuses to show any sign either
of appreciation or criticism of Arjuna's stand. The Lord
understands that his friend is raving hysterically and the
best policy is to allow a mental patient first of all to bring
out everything in his mind and thus exhaust himself.
37. Therefore we shall not kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, our
relatives; for how can we be happy by killing our own people, O
Madhava?
Here, Arjuna concludes his seemingly logical arguments
which have got a false look of Hindu scriptural sanction.
More than deliberate blasphemers of a scripture, the
unconscious misinterpreters of a sacred text are the
innocent criminals who bring about the wretched
downfall of its philosophy. Purring with the satisfaction of
a cat in the kitchen, Arjuna, in this verse, is licking up his
arguments all round and is coming to the dangerous
conclusion that he should not kill the aggressors, nor face
their heartless challenge! Even then Krishna is silent.
34
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjun's discomfiture makes him really quite conspicuous
in his ugliness. In the second line of the stanza, he makes a
personal appeal to Krishna and almost begs of him to
think for himself and endorse Partha's own lunatic
conclusions.
With the familiarity born out of his long-standing
friendship, Arjuna addresses his charioteer with affection
as Madhava, and asks him how one can come to any
happiness after one has destroyed one's own kinsmen...
Still, Krishna remains silent.
38. Though these, with their intelligence clouded by greed, see
no evil in the destruction of the families in the society, and no
sin in their cruelty to friends; . . .
39. Why should not we, who clearly see evil in the destruction of
the family-units, learn to turn away from this sin, O
Janardana?
No doubt, the Kauravas, grown blind in their greed for
power and wealth, cannot see the destruction of the entire
social structure by this war. Their ambition has so
completely clouded their intelligence and sensibility that
they fail to appreciate or understand the cruelty in
annihilating their own friends.
But Arjuna seems to retain his reasoning capacity and can
clearly foresee the chaos in which society will get buried
by fratricidal war. Now his argument amounts to this: if a
35
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
friend of ours, in his drunkenness, behaves nastily, it
would be worse than drunkenness in us, if we were to
retaliate; for, we are expected to know that our friend,
with his fumed-up intelligence, does not entertain enough
discriminative awareness of what he is doing. At such
moments, it would be our duty to forgive the mischief and
overlook the impudence.
Similarly, here, Arjuna argues: "If Duryodhana and his
friends are behaving as blind aggressors, should the
Pandavas not retire quietly and suffer the ignominy of a
defeat, and consider it their dutiful offering at the altar of
peace?" How far this philosophy is dangerous in itself will
be seen as we read more and more the passages of the
Geeta and come to appreciate the pith of its philosophy
which is the very kernel of our Hindu way-of-living.
"Active resistance to evil" is the central idea in the doctrine
expounded by Krishna in the Geeta.
40. In the destruction of a family, the immemorial religious rites
of that family perish; on the destruction of spirituality, impiety
overcomes the whole family.
Just as a story-teller comes to add new details each time he
narrates the same old story, so too, Arjuna seems to draw
new inspiration from his foolishness, and each time his
creative intelligence puts forth fresh arguments in support
of his wrong philosophy. As soon as he finishes a stanza,
36
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
he gets, as it were, a new lease of arguments to prattle,
and takes refuge behind their noise.
He indicates here that, when individual families are
destroyed, along with them the religious traditions of the
society will also end, and soon an era of impiety will be
ushered in.
Cultural experiments were the pre-occupations of our
fore-fathers and they knew that the culture and tradition
of each family was a unit of the total culture and integrity
of the whole nation. Hence the important of the family-
Dharma so seriously brought forth by Arjuna as an
argument against this civil war.
41. By the prevalence of impiety, O Krishna, the women of the
family become corrupt; and women being corrupted, O
descendent of the Vrishni-clan, there arises "intermingling of
castes" (VARNA-SAMKARA) .
Continuing the argument in the previous verse, Partha
declares the consequences that will follow when the true
moral integrity of the families is destroyed. Slowly the
morality in the society will wane and there will be an
"admixture of castes."
Caste is a word, which, in its perverted meaning, has
recently come in for a lot of criticism from the educated;
and they, no doubt, are all justified, if caste, in reality,
meant what we understand it to be in our society today.
37
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
But what we witness around us, in the name of caste, is
the ugly decadence into which the Hindu way-of-living
has fallen. Caste, in those days, was conceived of as an
intelligent division of the available manpower in the
community on the basis of intellectual and mental
capacities of the individuals.
Those who were intellectuals and had a passion for
research and study were styled Brahmanas (Brahmins);
those who had political ambitions for leadership and took
upon themselves the risky art of maintaining peace and
plenty and saving the country from internal and external
aggressions, were called the Kshatriyas; those who served
the community though agriculture and trade were the
Vaishyas and, lastly, all those who did not fall in any of the
above categories were styled as Shudras, whose duties in
society were service and labour. Our modern social
workers and officials, agricultural and industrial labourers
all must fall under this noble category!
In the largest scope of its implication, when we thus
understand the caste-system, it is the same as today's
professional groups. Therefore, when they talk so
seriously about the inadvisability of "admixture of the
castes," they only mean what we already know to be true
in our own social pattern: an engineer in charge of a
hospital and working in the operation-theatre as a doctor
would be a social danger, as much as a doctor would be if
he is appointed as an officer for planning, guiding and
executing a hydro-electric scheme!
38
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When the general morality of society has decayed; the
young men and women, blinded by uncontrolled passion,
start mingling without restraint. And lust knows no logic
and cares least for better evolution or better culture. There
will be thereafter, unhealthy intermingling of
incompatible cultural traits.
42. 'Confusion of castes' leads the slayer of the family to hell; for
their forefathers fall, deprived of the offerings of PINDA (rice-
ball) and water (libations) .
The argument is still continued and Arjuna points out the
consequences of "caste-admixture." When confusion of the
castes has taken place, both outside in the moral life of
true discipline and in one's own inner temperament, then
the family tradition gets flouted and ruined.
In the context of our discourses, we must understand that
to the dead it is bread-and-water to see that their
survivors maintain and continue the cultural purity that
they themselves had so laboriously cultivated and
inculcated into the minds of their children. In case the
society squanders away its culture, so laboriously built up
as a result of the slow blossoming of the social values of
life through generations of careful cultivation necessarily,
we will be insulting the very labours of our ancestors. It is
attractive and poetic, indeed, to conceive of the dead as
watching over their survivors and observing their ways of
living from the balcony of their heavenly abode! It would
certainly be as painful as the pains of hunger and thirst to
39
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
them if they were to find that their survivors were
deliberately making a jungle of their laboriously laid
gardens. Understood thus, the entire stanza appears to be
very appropriate.
Each generation passes down the torch of its culture to the
next generation, its children, and it is for them to preserve,
tend and nourish that torch and hand it over carefully to
the succeeding generation, if not more, at least no less
bright, than when they got it.
In India, the sages discovered and initiated a culture that
is spiritual, and this spiritual culture is maintained and
worked out through religious practices, and therefore,
culture and religion are, to the Hindu, one and the same.
Very rarely we find any mention of the term culture, as
such, in our ancient literature. More often we meet with
the insistence on and the mention of our religious
practices.
In fact, the Hindu religion is a technique by which this
spiritual culture can be maintained and worked out in the
community. Therefore, we find in these stanzas, and in
similar contexts, always, an enthusiastic emphasis upon
the religious life, whether it be in the family or in the
society. Dharma comprises those divine values-of-life by
living which we manifest more and more the essential
spiritual being in us. Family-Dharma (Kula-Dharma) is thus
nothing but the rules of living, thinking, and acting in a
united, well-planned family. By strictly following these
40
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
rules we soon come to learn, in the prayer-rooms of our
homes, how to live as better citizens of the Aryan-culture.
43. By these evil deeds of the 'destroyers of the family, ' which
cause confusion of castes, the eternal religious rites of the caste
and the family are destroyed.
What was said in the discourse upon the last stanza will
become amply clear by this statement of Arjuna. Here also
he bemoans that, as a result of the civil war, the religious
traditions of the family will all be lost and when he says
so, as I have said earlier, if we understand religion as the
"spiritual culture of India," --- the training for which was
primarily given in the individual homes --- then the stanza
becomes self-explanatory. We also know that, after a war
there is a sudden cracking up of the existing cultural
values in any society. Our modern world, panting and
sighing under the burden of its own immoralities and
deceits, is an example of how war brings about, not only
disabled men with amputated limbs, but also deeper
ulcers and uglier deformities in their mental make-up.
In these words, we can detect in Arjuna almost the world's
first conscientious objector to war! In these passages he
offers a splendid series of pacifist arguments good for all
times!!
44. We have heard, O Janardana, that it is inevitable for those
men, in whose families the religious practices have been
destroyed, to dwell in hell for an unknown period of time.
41
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna still refuses to speak. Arjuna has come to a point
where he can neither stop talking nor find any more
arguments. Strangely compelling is the grace of the Lord's
dignified silence. Here, in the stanza, Arjuna almost
concludes his arguments and mentions the tradition
which he had heard, that "men whose family-religion has
broken down will go to hell."
But, on the other hand, when we understand the
statement in all its scientific implications, even the worst
of us will feel the immediate urgency for revolutionising
our point of view. We have already seen that the family
Dharma means, in the context of our times, only the
cultural purity in the family, which is the unit of the
community. We also found that since their culture is
essentially spiritual, to the Hindus "religion is culture."
So, Arjuna implies that when the unity of home-life is
shattered, and when purity of living and sanctity of
thought are destroyed in the individual home-life, the
generation that has caused such a shattering is ordering
for itself and for others a melancholy era of hellish
sorrows and sufferings.
45. Alas! We are involved in a great sin, in that we are prepared
to kill our kinsmen, from greed for the pleasures of the kingdom.
Though pitiable, it is indeed pleasantly ludicrous to watch
Arjuna's intellectual exhaustion and emotional weariness
as expressed in this verse. In his effeminate lack of self-
42
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
confidence here he bemoans, "Alas! We are involved, etc."
These words clearly show that instead of becoming a
master of the situation, Arjuna is now a victim of it. He
has not the virile confidence that he is the master of the
circumstances and, therefore, with a creeping sense of
growing inner cowardice, he feels almost helplessly
persecuted.
This unhealthy mental weakness drains off his heroism
and he desperately tries to put a paper-crown upon his
cowardice, to make it look divine and angelic, and to
parade it as 'pity'. Thus, he deliberately misconstrues the
very aim of the war and imputes a low motive to the
righteous war simply because he wants to justify his
pacifist idea, which does not instinctively gurgle out from
his known strength, but which oozes out from his
ulcerated mind.
46. If the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons-in-hand, slay me in
battle, unresisting and unarmed, that would be better for me.
Here, Arjuna declares his FINAL opinion that, under the
circumstances narrated during his long-drawn limping
arguments, it is better for him to die in battle unresisting
and unarmed, even if the Kauravas were to shoot him
down, like a hunted deer, with a dozen arrows piercing
his royal body!
The word that Arjuna uses here is particularly to be noted;
the texture of the word used is, in itself, a great
43
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
commentary upon the thought in the mind of the one who
has made the statement. Kshema is the material and
physical victory, while Moksha is the spiritual Self-
mastery. Though Arjuna's arguments were all labouring
hard to paint the idea that to have fought that was was
against the spiritual culture of the country (Moksha), he
himself stated in his conclusions that not to fight this war
would be a material blessing (Kshema) inasmuch as an
escape from the battle-field now is to gain, perhaps, sure
physical security!!
In short, anxiety for the fruit-of-his-action (victory in
battle) demoralised Arjuna and he got himself into an
'anxiety-state-neurosis.'
Sanjaya said : 47. Having thus spoken in the midst of the battle-
field, Arjuna sat down on the seat of the chariot, casting away
his bow and arrow, with a mind distressed with sorrow.
The concluding stanza of this chapter contains the words
of Sanjaya in which he gave the running commentary of
what he saw on the battle-field. Exhausted by his weary
arguments, Arjuna, completely shattered within, sank
back on the flag-staff in the open chariot, throwing down
his kingly weapons.
This is the scene at which we shall leave Arjuna in the
First Chapter of the Geeta.
44
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the first discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF THE ARJUNA-GRIEF
In the scriptural text-books of ancient times the end of a
chapter was indicated by some sign or symbol. In modern
days, this is not necessary, inasmuch as, we have the
passages in print before us and we can see that one section
or chapter has ended and another has begun. Even here,
the printers have to mark the end of one chapter and, by a
separate title, indicate the beginning of the next.
In olden days, it was much more difficult, since books
were not printed, and each student got during his study a
new edition of the scripture printed on the memory-slabs
of his own mind. Since scripture-study was in those days
from mouth to mouth, the students had to memorise
whole text-books and chant them daily. In such a case it
was necessary to have some word or words to inform both
the reciter and the listeners as to the ending of a section
and the fresh beginning of another. This was done by
some conventional symbol.
In the Upanishads, the accepted method was to recite the
last Mantra or the concluding portion of the last Mantra of
the chapter twice. In the Geeta, however, we have the
repetition of a statement, which may be considered as an
epilogue, in Sanskrit called a Sankalpa Vakya. The same
Sankalpa is repeated at the end of each chapter, the
45
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
difference being only that at the end of each chapter, the
chapter-number is mentioned along with the special title
of that chapter.
The Geeta Sankalpa vakya (Epilogue) is a beautiful
statement of pregnant words conveying a wealth of details
regarding the very text-book. Sreemad-Bhagawad-Geeta
has been considered here as an Upanishad-nay, each
chapter in the Geeta is considered as an Upanishad; and
among the eighteen Upanishads, together constituting the
Divine Song, we here end the first of them entitled "THE
YOGA OF ARJUNA'S DESPONDENCY." These chapters
are called Upanishads because these are declarations
concealing such deep significances that a hasty reader will
miss their full import unless he does long and intense
meditation over the wealth of suggestive meaning that lies
concealed behind the simple-looking stanzas. As in the
Upanishads, here also we need the help of a sympathetic
teacher who can train us in the art of opening the seven
hundred lockers in the treasure chamber of the Geeta.
Upanishad is a word indicating a literature that is to be
studied by sitting (shad), near (upa) a teacher, in a spirit of
receptive meekness and surrender (ni). The contents of the
scriptural text-books are, all over the world, always the
same. They teach us that there is a changeless Reality
behind the ever-changing phenomenal world of
perceptions, feelings and understanding. This great
ADVAITIC TRUTH as declared in the Hindu scriptural
text-books is termed the Brahman and, therefore, the text-
46
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
book that teaches us the nature of Brahman and shows us
the means of realising it is called Brahman-knowledge
(Brahma-Vidya).
Unlike Western philosophy, among the Aryans a theory is
accepted as a philosophy only when the philosopher
prescribes for us a practical technique by which all seekers
can come to discover and experience for themselves the
GOAL indicated in that philosophy. Thus, in all Hindu
philosophies there are two distinct sections: one
explaining the theory and the other describing the
technique of practice. The portion that explains the
technique of living the philosophy and coming to a close
subjective experience is called Yoga Shastra.
The word Yoga comes from the root Yuj = to join. Any
conscious attempt on the part of an individual to lift his
present available personality and attune it to a higher,
perfect ideal, is called Yoga, and the science of Yoga is
called Yoga Shastra. Since in this epilogue, the Geeta is
called a Yoga Shastra, we must expect to discover in the
SONG OF THE LORD, not only airy philosophical
expositions of a Truth too subtle for the ordinary man to
grasp, but also instructions by which every one of us can,
from this present state of imperfection, hope to reach, step
by step, the giddy heights of the Divine pinnacles, that
stand eternally swathed in the transcendental glory of
Absolute Perfection.
47
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The theme of philosophy and Yoga cannot be very
attractive to the ordinary men of the world because it is so
scientific and it deals with imperceptible ideologies.
Mathematics cannot be thrilling reading except for a
mathematician; and mathematics can very well afford to
ignore those who have no taste for it. But religion tries to
serve all and the anxiety of all prophets is to serve every
one in all generations. Thus, in order to tame a difficult
theme and to contain it within the ambit of a text-book of
universal acceptance, the teachers of old had to discover
methods by which the subjective ideologies could be
given an appealing look of substantial objectivity. This
was done by giving a detailed picture of the teacher, so
that in our mental image he is so much familiarised that
we feel his words also as something very familiar to us.
In the tradition of the Hindu text-books, the great Rishis
worked out the subtle ideas containing the crystallised
truths into an easily digestible capsule called Dharma. In
the Upanishads, we have a complete picture of a teacher
and a taught, painted with hasty strokes, unfinished and
rough. In the Geeta, on the other hand, it being a
philosophical discourse embedded in the mythology of
the nation, we find a finished picture, palpitating with life,
against a scintillating situation, wherein the very same
ancient truths have been re-asserted.
Lord Krishna is now made to repeat the Upanishadic truths
in the context of a great conflict to serve his life-long
friend Arjuna, who is shown as seriously suffering from a
48
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
total mental rupture. Therefore, we shall expect in the
Geeta a much more sympathetic explanation and
guidance than when the same truths came out from the
inspired saints, who were not as much in contact with the
weaknesses of ordinary mortals. This glory of the Geeta
has been indicated here when the Sankalpa Vakya says that
it is a conversation between the Lord and a mortal.
This chapter is called by a self-contradicting title. It is
named as the Yoga of ARJUNA'S GRIEF. If 'grief' could be
Yoga, almost all of us, without a choice, are already
Yogins. In the commentary of this chapter, I indicated that
the Arjuna-condition of utter despair is the auspicious
mental attitude wherein the Geeta-seeds are to be sown,
and the flowers of Krishna-perfection gathered. Be it in an
individual or a society, in a community or a nation,
religion and philosophy will be in demand only when the
heart has come to experience the Arjuna-grief.
To the extent that the world of today has felt its
incompetence to face the battle of life, not daring to
destroy their near and dear values of economic expansion
and industrial lust, to that extent it is fit for listening to the
message of the Geeta. Just as the act of cooking, by itself, is
not fulfilled without the eating that follows, so also, in
spite of the best that may be available in life, a sense of
incompleteness is felt and a deep hunger to gain a better
awareness and fuller existence in the world is
experienced. The scriptural texts cannot in themselves
help any one. Since this mental condition is so
49
