Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 15
Purushothama Yoga
The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit
The Blessed Lord said: 1. They (wise people) speak of the
indestructible ASHWATTHA tree as having its roots above
and branches below, whose leaves are the VEDAS ; he who
knows it, is alone a Veda-knower.
Reminiscent of the casual picture of the "Peepal-tree"
brought up in the Kathopanishad (VI-1), here Vyasa
exhaustively paints the Tree-of-life and shows its
relationship with the Infinite. If the Spirit be one-without-
a-second, out of this one Consciousness how did the
world-of-matter --- constituted of the body and its
perceptions, the mind and its feelings, the intellect and its
thoughts --- arise? Even if it has so risen up, what
nourishes it and sustains it? What exactly is the
relationship between God, the CREATOR, and the world,
the CREATED --- the Infinite and the finite? These are
some of the questions that generally rise up in any human
intellect, once it is set to contemplate upon life.
The picture of the "Peepal-tree" unveiled in these three
stanzas serves as a beautiful allegory of the entire spiritual
concept expounded in this chapter.
1059
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Ashwattha is botanically known as Ficus Religiosa,
popularly called the Peepal-tree, which, according to
some, has gathered its name "because horses used to stand
under its shade (Ashwattha)." According to Shankara, this
tree has been chosen to represent the entire cosmos
because of its derivative meaning --- Shwa means
"tomorrow"; Stha means "that which remains"; therefore:
A-shwattha: "that which will NOT remain the same till
tomorrow." In short, the word indicates the ephemeral,
the ever-changing, world of the phenomena.
It is described here that the Ashwattha-tree has its roots
"up" (Urdhwa). Accepting directly the literal meaning, we
have got some spiritually absurd, religiously mischievous,
and aesthetically ugly 'pictures' of this Tree-of-Samsara,
painted by some illiterate artists, and made easily
available in the Indian markets. It is an insult to the
mighty majesty of this scriptural picture.
According to Anandagiri, Samsara is represented as a tree
(Vriksha) because of the etymological meaning of the
Sanskrit term, Vriksha: "that which can be cut down." The
experiences of change and sorrow which the world-of-
plurality gives us can be totally ended through
detachment. The Tree-of-Multiplicity that has seemingly
sprung forth from the Infinite Consciousness Divine, can
be cut down by shifting our attention from the tree to the
Divine.
1060
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Luckily, we who are educated in modern universities,
have a similar use of the term "tree" in our history text-
books. The 'family trees' of kings and dynasties are,
without any exception, shown as branching down from
their ancestral 'source.' Similarly, the Tree-of-Samsara has
its roots UP in the Divine Consciousness. A tree holds
itself up and gets nourished by its roots; similarly, the
"experiences" of change, and the "experiencer" of them, are
all established in the Infinite and draw their sustenance
from It alone.
"Even then," many of our friends doubt, "why is the word
'UP' (Urdhwa) used?" It is used here in the same
connotation as we use the term 'up' in our every-
day expressions, like 'HIGH-command': 'HIGHER-
officials': 'TOP-men': 'UPPER-class': 'HIGH-class jewellery'
etc. In all these cases, by the term HIGH or UP or TOP, no
geometrical elevation is indicated, but it indicates a
superiority, a greater nobility, or value. Psychologically, it
is natural for man to concede, for the subtler and the
diviner, a HIGHER place of reverence and to consider the
grosser and the devilish as belonging to a LOWER status.
The Perfect is the Highest Consciousness, illumined and
vitalised by which alone can the body-mind-intellect
equipment experience its world of "perception-emotion-
thought." Naturally, therefore, the world-of-plurality is
allegorically pictured here as the fig-tree --- arising from
and sustained by the Higher Consciousness,
1061
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Reality.
This world-of-change (Ashwattha) is considered here as
eternal (Avyaya), only in a relative sense. Any peepal-tree
in any village must have observed many generations
playing and growing up under its shade, and thus, with
reference to man's average age, the fig-tree can be
considered as RELATIVELY eternal. Similarly, with
reference to the generations that grow, conceive, plan,
strive, achieve and die away, the world itself can be
considered as RELATIVELY immortal.
For this tree-of-life "THE VEDAS THEMSELVES ARE
THE LEAVES" --- Veda means 'knowledge.' Knowledge
does bring forth a greater spurt of dynamism of life into
the world. In comparison with the modern world --- with
its colossal endeavours, mighty achievements, and
superhuman aspirations --- the ancient generations were,
relatively speaking, not even alive. More the knowledge a
generation acquires, clearer becomes its vision of a greater
future and diviner possibilities, and therefore, more is the
amount of effort put forth by it to achieve the perceived
goal. Now to compare Veda-'knowledge,' to the leaves of
the "Tree" is not quite inappropriate. Leaves are areas
from which the water contents get evaporated in all trees,
and this, in its turn, creates the 'osmotic-pressure' in the
roots and facilitates the roots to draw more quantity of
nourishment from the earth. Cut down the leaves of a tree
and its growth is immediately stunted; the larger the
number of branches and leaves, the greater is the tree's
1062
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dimension and growth. Where there is greater knowledge,
there we are sure to find a greater flare of manifest-life.
HE WHO KNOWS IT, IS A KNOWER OF THE VEDA ---
He alone, who has realised not only the Ashwattha-tree,
but also the Higher, from which it derives its existence, is
the one who has fulfilled his knowledge of the Vedas. The
Vedas indicate the One Eternal Principle from which all
the realms of experience have sprung. Neither pure
science, nor mere devotion, can achieve the Truth of
perfect knowledge, is the conclusion of the Geeta.
Knowledge is perfect only when we know of the here and
the hereafter, of the finite and the Infinite, of the created
and the Creator. All the rest of the pursuits of knowledge,
however spectacular they might be, are, at best, only one-
sided views of the whole Truth. The Man-of-Perfect-
'Wisdom,' as conceived by the Vedas, is the knower of both
the PERISHABLE and the IMPERISHABLE; and such a
man alone is recognised by Krishna as the Vedavit ---
knower of the Vedas.
NOW FOLLOWS ANOTHER FIGURATIVE RE-
PRESENTATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THIS TREE OF
SAMSARA:
2. Below and above are spread its branches, nourished by the
GUNAS; sense-objects are its buds; and below, in the world of
men, stretch forth the roots, originating in action.
1063
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Continuing to paint the picture of the Tree-of-Samsara, we
have here the etching in more details. Such mystical
representations should not be taken too literally, whether
in literature or in art. The very style of the Vedas is
couched in mysticism. Taking any convenient object of the
world and describing it in such a poetic style so as to
express some of the subtler philosophical truths and
thereby to convey some deeper religious message, is
called mysticism.
Describing the Tree-of-life and adding more details to it,
Vyasa says: "UPWARDS AND DOWNWARDS ITS
BRANCHES SPREAD" --- the flow of life in the individual,
as well as in the world, is sometimes towards the higher
evolutionary purposes, but more often it tends to cater to
the lower animal nature. These two tendencies are
significant here when it is said that the branches of the
Tree-of-life grow both "upwards and downwards."
PATTERNED BY THE GUNAS --- These urges for living
the higher and the lower values are maintained and
nourished by the particular type of psychological
tendencies gunas available in the individual. In an earlier
chapter (XIV) the play of the gunas (moods of the mind)
has been exhaustively discussed.
In any tree there are nodular buds which are potential
branches that have not yet developed, but are waiting for
a chance to burst forth. Corresponding to them, Krishna
says, in the Ashwattha-tree, are the sense-objects, the
1064
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'buds.' It is a fact that in the presence of an 'object' our
tendencies revolt against all our higher concepts and
ideals, and run amuck to gain their gratification: a new
"branch."
DOWNWARD THE ROOTS EXTEND --- If the main root
of the Tree-of-Samsara is lost in the Absolute Reality, High
above, the "secondary roots" which spring from it are
spread all around, and grow even downward, "IN THE
WORLD OF MAN, INITIATING ALL ACTIONS." Here,
secondary roots are thought-channels (vasanas), which are
created in us, and which propel each one of us towards his
own typical actions and reactions in the world. They are
the very causes that promote man's evil as well as
meritorious activities in the world. Just as the main tap-
root, while spreading its secondary roots, claws the earth
through them and gets the plant well-rooted, so
too, these Samskaras, actions and their reactions, both good
and evil, bind the individuals fast to the earthy plane of
likes and dislikes, of profits and losses, of earning and
spending.
THE FOLLOWING TWO STANZAS INDICATE HOW
WE CAN ANNIHILATE THE TREE AND THEREBY
COME TO EXPERIENCE THE PURE SOURCE OF ALL
LIFE'S MANIFESTATIONS, THE INFINITE LIFE:
1065
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
3. Its form is not perceived here as such, neither its end, nor its
origin, nor its foundation, nor its resting-place; having cut
asunder this firm-rooted ASHWATTHA -tree with the strong
axe of non-attachment. . .
4. Then that Goal should be sought after, where having gone,
none returns again. I seek refuge in that 'primeval PURUSHA'
from which streamed forth, from time immemorial, all activity
(or energy) .
In order that the students may not misunderstand this
mystic symbolism, and take the Tree too literally, the Geeta
acharya owns that 'ITS FORM, AS SUCH, IS NOT
PERCEIVED HERE.' The Tree-of-life, as described in the
previous stanzas, evidently represents the entire field of
manifested life. The subtle Principle of Life manifests
through us, in different planes and in a variety of forms ---
as perceptions of the body; as emotions and feelings of the
mind; as ideals and thoughts of the intellect; and as mere
non-apprehension of the causal-body. All these vehicles
and their experiences, manifesting in the Infinite Life, in
their totality, constitute the Ashwatth a-tree spreading out
into all quarters. Naturally, therefore, Lord Krishna says
that very few have the comprehensive vision to see them
all as such in one gaze.
Not only are the different vehicles and their expressions
not recognised as such in their entirety, but very few of us
in the world come to recognise "THEIR END OR THEIR
BEGINNING, OR THEIR EXISTENCE.' The Tree-of-life
1066
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
springs from the 'ignorance'of Reality (Avidya) and it ends
on the "realisation of the Self" (Vidya), and it exists only so
long as the mental demands and desires (vasanas)
function. These subjective implications are not generally
perceived, or recognised, or understood, by the majority
of men.
The manifested world constituting the Ashwattha-tree can
be cleft 'BY THE STRONG AXE OF DETACHMENT." The
world of matter is inert and insentient. The experience of
life gained through it is known and lived only because of
the play of Consciousness upon it. As long as the wheels
of a car are geared on to the machine, the vehicle moves.
In case we can clutch the motive-power off from the
moving wheels, the vehicle must necessarily come to its
own natural motionless condition. Similarly, if
Consciousness is withdrawn from the body-mind-intellect
vehicle, its play of perception-emotion-thought must
necessarily halt. This clutching off of Consciousness from
the inert matter vehicles is detachment. With the axe of
detachment, Krishna advises Arjuna, to cut down the tree
of multiple experiences.
At our present level of conscious-existence we are apt to
protest against this advice, because, to us detachment
from these three vehicles is a complete retirement from the
worlds of perception, from the realms of emotion, and
from the fields of thought. In fact, we know no other
world to tread, and therefore, intellectually, we reach but
a state of utter nihilistic nothingness. This is a despairing
1067
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
situation indeed. But Krishna adds, almost in the same
breath, "THEN THAT GOAL SHOULD BE SOUGHT
AFTER, TO WHICH MEN GO AND DO NOT RETURN
AGAIN."
On the whole, the tone of suggestion and the manner of
expression in these two stanzas clearly indicate that the
students who seek the Divine in themselves should learn
to withdraw more and more from their usual dissipations
with perceptions, feelings and thoughts, and must, in "the
still moments of meditation, contemplate upon the Higher
--- the Source from which the Ashwattha-tree itself draws
its sustenance and nourishment.
Had this advice been merely given out and left at that, it
would have been, at best, only a poetic vision, or an
impossible suggestion. As a practical hand-book of
instructions to man on how to live nobly and grow out of
his instinctive weaknesses, the Geeta has to show the
seekers some practical methods of self-improvement at
every stage. And this is accomplished when the stanzas
are closed with a prayer: "I SEEK REFUGE IN THAT
PRIMEVAL PURUSHA WHENCE STREAMED FORTH
THE ANCIENT CURRENT."
The stanza indicates that when our personality has, to a
maximum degree, retired from its extrovert pursuits, the
intellect is to be consciously turned, in an attitude of love
and surrender, to the goal --- the goal from which the
stream of Consciousness flows to the matter-vehicles
1068
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
facilitating them to play their parts. In short, HALT the
manifestations of life, and seek the Eternal Life, the Source
of all expressions of life. What this primeval Purusha is
and how one is to conceive It is the theme of the entire
chapter.
WHAT SORT OF SEEKERS REACH THE GOAL?
LISTEN:
5. Free from pride and delusion, victorious over the evil of
attachment, dwelling constantly in the Self, their desires having
completely retired, freed from the pairs-of-opposites --- such as
pleasure and pain --- the undeluded reach that Goal Eternal.
Philosophy, in India, is something to live and to practise.
Ultimately, it is fulfilled only when we come to experience
its goal. It is natural, therefore, that in our scriptures and
spiritual text-books, we find a wealth of instructions and
elaborate discussions on the theories of Perfection. This
stanza is a typical example of the detailed instructions
supplied to guide the adventurous seekers trying to
follow the "path." Five conditions are explained herein
which are nothing but certain disciplines, adjustments,
and re-education of the vehicles of life; and Krishna
concludes that those who have accomplished these shall
reach the Divine experience and live a life enjoying a sense
of supreme fulfilment.
1069
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FREE FROM PRIDE AND DELUSION --- Both these
qualities of pride and delusion indicate a false,
exaggerated estimate, of one-self and of others. Erroneous
estimate of one's own importance is called pride and it
brings about an enormous amount of heavy
responsibilities upon oneself to maintain it. There is no
time thereafter to cultivate oneself, or to seek knowledge,
or to get truly educated. Similarly, error in judgement
regarding things and beings, happenings and situations,
in the world outside, is called DELUSION. It makes us live
in a false world of our own imagination without actually
facing the immediate problems around us, as they really
are.
WITH THE EVIL OF ATTACHMENT CONQUERED ---
To live in the flesh, seeking our life's fulfilment only in the
joy derived from our contact with the sense-objects in the
world around us, is to live in the outer layer, cheating
ourselves entirely of life's deeper possibilities. Such an
ignorant fool gets extremely attached to the objects of the
world, and once this attachment has grown, all his
attentions in life will be irresistibly turned towards those
objects. Shackled by them, ever dancing to their rhythm of
change and destruction, he comes to lay waste his powers,
without ever realising the nobler purpose of the Life-
Divine.
EVER DWELLING IN THE SELF --- Detachment from the
world-of-objects is never possible without attaching
ourselves to something nobler and diviner. The human
1070
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mind-intellect-equipment can exist only in the positive
contemplation of some object. It cannot remain in a void
of not contemplating anything. For example, from
tomorrow onwards, let us determine NOT to think of a
bald-headed man, let us say, as soon as we wake up; it is
absolutely certain that the following morning, the very
first thing which we will remember will be a bald-head.
But supposing we give the mind a positive point to
contemplate upon, "Narayana-Narayana," we shall find
that the mind has totally avoided the thought. In the same
way, in order that the mind may not have the evil
attachment in it, it should live in a spirit of contemplation
upon the Self.
THEIR DESIRES COMPLETELY AT REST --- Desire is the
function of the intellect. When the intellect desires, the
mind starts contemplating upon the desired objects; as the
desire, so the thoughts. Therefore, the intellect should be
disciplined not to desire the finite joys arising out of the
ephemeral sense-objects of the world. When the desires
have ended, the mind becomes still.
RELEASED FROM THE PAIRS-OF-OPPOSITES, LIKE
PLEASURE AND PAIN --- When the body comes in
contact with a sense-object, it is the mind that comes to
experience, as it were, the final result of the contact as
pleasure or pain. Once the mind starts recognising this
pair, then it is natural for it to revolt against 'pain' and
instinctively seek 'pleasure.' Unfortunately, in this mad
onrush of seeking pleasure and avoiding pain, there is no
1071
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stability, for the very things that constituted joys
yesterday, prove to be sources of sorrow today. To cater to
the whims and fancies of such an unsteady entity is to
barter away our chances to bring about any cultural
unfoldment in ourselves.
And the stanza concludes by a positive and optimistic
declaration, having in its force and style, the vehemence of
a commandment, when it says, "THE UNDELUDED
REACH THAT GOAL-ETERNAL." Consciousness
expressed through Matter-vehicles is the miserable man,
torn by his own stresses and strains; and the same
Consciousness, gathered from these vehicles and
experienced as such, is the Divine moment of Infinite
realisation.
THE GOAL IS AGAIN CLEARLY SPECIFIED THUS:
6. Nor does the Sun shine there, nor the moon, nor fire; to which
having gone they return not; that is My Supreme Abode.
Consecutively, in the two previous stanzas, it was
repeatedly asserted that the goal sought in spiritual life is
one, "HAVING ATTAINED WHICH THERE IS NO
RETURN EVER." The very same idea, that Perfection
gained is an irrevocable fact and that there is no more any
fear of return to the natural stupidities of a limited ego-
centric life, is being emphasised in this stanza also.
Repetition is a method of emphasis in all scriptural
1072
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
literature. No doubt, this method is not used everywhere.
Wherever logic is available, ideas are nailed in by logical
reasonings. but there are realms, into which the teacher
alone has admission in the beginning and not the student-
class, and therefore, the Rishis had no other go but to
repeatedly assert for our acceptance, the nature and
condition of the unknown experience of the Infinite.
This glorious State-of-Perfection is the Goal which almost
all stanzas in the Geeta consistently indicate and though it
is an Absolute State, here an honest attempt is being made
to describe It in terms of finite phenomena.
NEITHER SUN, NOR MOON, NOR FIRE ILLUMINES
THAT --- Herein are enumerated almost all the sources-of-
light, blessed by which the physical eyes experience
vision. To see a thing is to know it; and in order that the
organ-of-vision might use its power of seeing, it is not
only sufficient that objects are in front of the sense-organ,
but they must also be bathed in light. In the medium of
light alone can the eyes see forms and colours. Again, not
only do the eyes perceive; but the ears pick up sounds, the
nose the smell, the tongue the tastes, and the skin the
touch. Each instrument perceives its objects. Even this is
not all. We can perceive our feelings and also our ideas.
The 'light' in which we thus perceive all our sense-objects,
all our emotions, and all our thoughts, is the Light of
Consciousness by which alone we become AWARE of all
our experiences.
1073
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This Light of Consciousness cannot be illumined by the
gross sources of light available in the world outside, such
as the Sun, the Moon or the Fire. In fact the very
light of the Sun, or the Moon, or the Fire is an 'object' of
our Consciousness; we are constantly conscious of it. An
OBJECT of perception cannot illumine the SUBJECT that
perceives it --- the SUBJECT and the OBJECT cannot be at
any time one and the same. The AWARENESS by which
we come to experience all our life's joys and sorrows is the
Eternal Self, and to realise that Consciousness is indicated
as the Supreme Goal by the Geeta.
THAT IS MY SUPREME ABODE --- This State of
Conscious-ness into which we can rise on transcending
the agitations of the mind and intellect is described here as
the Abode of the Divine, the Dwelling Place Supreme,
wherein we can confidently make an appointment with
Truth and "meet" the Infinite!
Utilitarians as we are, certainly all seekers will doubt
whether the experience of Truth is worth having at such a
tremendous effort. Is there not a risk of our falling back
into our present confusions and getting deluded by a
finite pain-ridden world of plurality? This fear is allayed
and the seekers are assured, for the third time
continuously in this stanza, when Krishna qualifies, "MY
SUPREME ABODE" as one "TO WHICH HAVING GONE
NONE RETURNS."
1074
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is an experienced fact that when one has mastered a
knowledge, it is almost impossible for one to make any
more mistakes in it; to a great musician, to sing
deliberately out of tune, in disharmonious notes, is as
difficult as it is for a beginner to sing correctly. Having
known a language, to talk ungrammatically is as difficult
as it is for the illiterate to talk correctly. If, in the imperfect
world of imperfect knowledge, a cultured man, educated
and artistic, cannot easily fall back to the levels of the
uncivilised and the illiterate, how much more must it be
an impossible act for the Perfect to come back and fall into
the earlier confusions which are created by 'ignorance'!
This is one of the rarest stanzas in the religious literature
of the world which, in so simple a style, has indicated, so
exhaustively, the Unconditioned-Pure-Self, the Infinite-
Reality. In Hinduism, it has always been emphasised that
there is a continuity of existence after death and an
individual continues his biography in a new embodiment
under a new set of environments. The individuality, thus
undergoing experiences of birth and death repeatedly, is
called the Jiva, or the embodied-self. This Jiva is the Eternal
Light of Consciousness, playing upon, and SEEMINGLY
conditioned by, the subtle-body, constituted of the mind-
intellect equipment.
In short, death is only a phenomenon, wherein a given
subtle-body changes its physical-equipment, seeking
'fresh fields and pastures new' for its expression and
expansion. This process is not the reaching of the Infinite;
1075
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
for, 'MY ABODE' IS THAT 'WHEREIN HAVING GONE
THERE IS NO RETURN.'
TO CLEAR THIS POSSIBLE DOUBT THE STRUCTURE
AND THE NATURE OF THE EGO ( JIVA) IS
EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
7. An eternal portion of Myself, having become a living soul in
the world of life, and abiding in PRAKRITI, draws (to itself) the
(five) senses, with mind for the sixth.
A RAY OF MYSELF --- The Infinite has no parts. It can
suffer no divisions within Itself, and yet, just as with
reference to the four walls of my room I consider the
'room-space' as different from the 'outer-space,' so too,
with reference to a given mind-intellect vehicle, the
Infinite Light of Consciousness playing upon it is
considered, by the ignorant, as limited by its vehicles. The
moon-in-the-bucket, will dance and break up into bits
when the water in the bucket trembles at the touch of a
passing breeze. Even if a million such reflected moons
were to be broken and shattered, the immortal moon in
the heavens will not suffer any destruction. Similarly, the
ego-centric personality (Jiva), born out of the
Consciousness playing upon a given subtle-body, suffers
not any sense of limitations. Even though the ego changes
with its joys and sorrows, with its knowledge and
ignorance, with its peace and agitations, the essential
nature of the Infinite Consciousness that sparkles in our
1076
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
heart is Eternal indeed, and hence the stanza qualifies the
Self-in-man as: 'THE ETERNAL JIVA IN THE WORLD OF
JIVAS.'
ATTRACTS THE SENSES --- This Spark of Consciousness
vibrates the entire body with life, renders existence
possible for a living creature, and maintains, by its mere
presence, the sense-faculties and the mental-capacities
around Itself. No doubt these are faculties that belong to
matter, but at the same time, these powers of seeing,
hearing, etc. and also of feeling, thinking, etc., are not the
powers of the sense-organs, or even of the inner organs
(Antah-karana). They are the expressions of the Spirit when
It functions through matter, and hence, it is said that along
with the mind and the five senses, 'ABIDING IN THE
PRAKRITI,' (Chapter XIII) It functions. That this
conditioned-Self is experienced as the limited ego, the
mortal, because of our ignorance or error of judgement
that It is only a portion, as it were, an imaginary portion of
the indivisible whole, etc., --- have all been proved in the
Geeta.
WHEN DOES THE INFINITE DRAW THESE FACULTIES
AROUND IT?
8. When the Lord obtains a body, and when He leaves it, He
takes these and goes (with them) as the wind takes the scents
from their seats (the flowers) .
1077
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When the Lord acquires a body, meaning, when the
Infinite deludes Itself that It is conditioned by the mind-
intellect, It becomes the Jiva; and the Jiva takes to itself
various bodies from time to time and incarnates in
different environments, which are ordered by its own
burning desires and aspirations, and which are most
suited for exhausting and fulfilling all its demands. From
the moment the Jiva enters a body till it leaves it, it keeps
these sense faculties and mental impressions at all times
with itself. In fact, the 'subtle-body' includes all these
faculties.
At death, the 'subtle-body' permanently departs from the
'gross-body' which is left inert. The dead-body, though
found to maintain the shape of the very individual, has no
more any sense faculty or mental ability or intellectual
capacity, that it had expressed before. These expressions,
physical, mental and intellectual, were those which gave
the body an individual personality-stature. All these
constitute the "subtle-body", and the "gross-body," bereft
of its subtle essence, is called the dead-body.
At the time of death, the 'subtle-body,' as it is described
here, moves off gathering unto itself all faculties, "EVEN
AS THE WIND TAKES SCENTS FROM THEIR RESTING
PLACES", a passing breeze is not at any time separate
from atmospheric air that is everywhere, and yet, when
the breeze passes over a flower, or some sandal-paste, or a
scent-bottle --- which are all seats of fragrance --- it carries
with it the respective aroma. Similarly, the subtle-body,
1078
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
when it moves out, carries along with it the senses, mind
and intellect, not in any gross-form, but as a mere
"fragrance" of what all they had lived through, felt in, and
thought of. Thus viewed, the mind is nothing but a bundle
of vasanas. These vasanas can exist only in the Infinite
Consciousness, and the Light of Awareness illumining the
vasanas is called the 'individual personality' --- Jiva.
In this stanza the Jiva is called the Lord (Ishwara) only
because the 'individual personality' is the Lord of the
body, that orders, commands, and regulates all its actions,
feelings and thoughts. Just as an officer, on receiving his
transfer orders from the Government, packs up his
belongings and moves out of his residence for the time
being, and having reached the new seat of appointment
unpacks and spreads out his furniture for his comforts, so
too, at the time of departing from the body, the subtle-
body gathers itself from the gross 'dwelling place,' and on
reaching the new physical structure, it spreads itself out
again to use its faculties through that new "house-of-
experience." These stanzas are really a summary of the
Upanishadic declarations.
THIS SUBTLE-BODY, DESCRIBED IN THE PREVIOUS
STANZAS ROUGHLY AS "THE FIVE SENSES AND THE
MIND AS THE SIXTH," IS BEING EXPLAINED
FURTHER IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
1079
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
9. Presiding over the ear, the eye, the touch, the taste and the
smell, so also the mind, He enjoys the sense-objects.
The Jiva through the equipment of the mind, enjoys the
world-of-objects available in the new environment,
through the sense-organs of hearing, seeing, touching,
tasting, and smelling, which are expressed through their
respective organs of the ear, the eye, the skin, the tongue,
and the nose.
The pure Light of Consciousness never illumines any
object, because in the Pure Light of the Infinite, there are
no objects at all to illumine. It is only the Light of
Consciousness reflected in the mind-intellect that becomes
the special beam of light, the intelligence, in which alone
the sense-objects become illumined. That is why, very
often, when we are thinking intensively on some problem,
even if some of our friends come in front of us and talk to
us, we neither see, nor hear them. The image of the object
has already fallen on the retina of the eye, and the sound
of the speaker has made the necessary vibrations on the
tympanum of the ears, and yet, we see or hear nothing,
because the conscious mind is turned elsewhere.
Therefore, using the mind along with each sense
separately, the individualised ego (Jiva) the dweller-in-the-
body-enjoys the sense-objects such as sound, form, touch,
etc.
IF THE CONSCIOUSNESS WHICH IS ETERNAL AND
PERFECT IS SO INTIMATELY PRESENT IN EVERY
1080
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
EXPERIENCE OF MAN, HOW IS IT THAT WE, WHO
ARE LIVING THROUGH VIVID AND REAL
EXPERIENCES AT EVERY MOMENT OF OUR
EXISTENCE, FAIL TO RECOGNISE THIS DIVINE
PERFECTION, WHICH IS SO CONSTANTLY WITH US
AT ALL TIMES AND EVERYWHERE? THE SELF IS
VISIBLE ONLY TO THE EYE-OF-KNOWLEDGE.
10. Him, who departs, stays and enjoys, who is united with
GUNAS, the deluded do not see; but they do behold Him, who
posses the "eye-of-Knowledge. "
It is true everywhere that a common man, though
observing an object does not fully and correctly
understand it. The better understanding of things is
always reserved for the man of knowledge.
Everybody can read a great piece of literature, but a man
of letters alone can come to comprehend and enjoy fully
the vision expressed in and through the artistic design of
the piece.
Only a jeweller can really estimate the quality and worth
of a jewel, even though all can look at it.
Everyone can hear music, but only a musician can judge
and experience the subtle beauties in a masterly recital.
1081
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, every one of us, so long as life resides in us, can
perceive, feel and think, and yet, it is only the "wise" man
who can come to recognise and live the Infinite Essence of
Life Itself.
The Infinite Self is at all times present and never is there a
time when It is not. When LEAVING the body, the subtle-
body is vitalised by the presence of the Spirit. While the
body is EXISTING, the Self is illuminating all experiences.
While ENJOYING the pleasures of life, it is the Light of
Consciousness that illumines for us all our mental
experiences and our intellectual judgements. At moments,
our entire mental climate changes from peaceful calmness
(Sattwa) to riotous agitations (Rajas), or sinks into a dull
inertia (Tamas), and all these moments, whatever be the
nature of the climate within, are experienced only by the
Light of Consciousness. And yet the unintelligent one
perceives not this Conscious Knowledge that is constantly
making him aware of his moment-to-moment experiences.
An average man is so much preoccupied with the details
of experiences that, he, clinging to his desires for enjoying
the outer beauty of things and situations, comes to
overlook and fails to recognise the steady Light of
Consciousness in him, in the presence of which alone can
any experience be ever possible. Those who have got the
necessary detachment from the minor details of the outer
field-of-experience alone come to recognise and live the
joys of the Pure Self --- the Subject.
1082
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This special vision available to the man-of-Perfection is
called the 'EYE-OF-WISDOM' in the stanza. This is not
any special inner organ as such; it only represents an extra
faculty that develops in the spiritual seeker, with which he
comes to perceive the deeper significances and subtler
suggestions in the superficially chaotic play of plurality.
Those who do not have this intuitive perception
necessarily fail to have this vision of the play of the
Immortal Divine in and through the day-to-day activities
and happenings. The same idea is more artistically
stressed by Sri Shankara elsewhere. This 'EYE-OF-
KNOWLEDGE' cannot be developed unless the
disciplines of Self-perfection are properly practised. The
subjective technique of self-integration (Yoga) can be
successfully brought about only when complete
integration of personality at the outer levels has taken
place.
A FEW ONLY ULTIMATELY COME TO EXPERIENCE
THIS SELF, WHILE OTHERS, EVEN THOUGH
STRIVING, FAIL TO HAVE THIS REALISATION. WHY?
11. The seekers striving (for Perfection) behold Him dwelling in
the Self; but, the unrefined and unitelligent, even though
striving, see Him not.
Those who are successful in their attempts at stilling their
mind and cleaning their intellect of its disturbing
attachments and desires, come to recognise the glory of
1083
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Self and experience Its Infinite Beatitude. But it is also
true that all those who mechanically put in plenty of self-
effort (Yoga) do not necessarily succeed. Hundreds are
those who complain that though they were regular in their
spiritual programme for years, no appreciable amount of
self-development has come to them. One may wonder
why this should be so.
This moot point is being answered here very logically.
"THOUGH STRIVING, THOSE OF UNREFINED MIND
AND DEVOID OF WISDOM, PERCEIVE HIM NOT." Two
conditions are unavoidable if meditation is to ultimately
yield its promised result: (a) The purification of the mind
is generally defined as removal of agitations (Vikshepa)
created by one's false ego-centric attachment to sense-
objects; (b) Also, the intellect is to be tuned up properly to
a correct understanding of the nature of the Self, and thus
all doubts of the misty mind (Avarana) that veil its right
perception are also to be removed through study,
reflection and practice. If these two adjustments are not
properly accomplished, through practice of devotion
(Bhakti-Yoga) and service (Karma-Yoga), all attempts at
meditation in the "Path-of-Knowledge" can only end in
failure.
In short, the stanza emphasises that those whose minds
have not been properly regenerated through practice of
self-control of the senses, and who have not renounced
and abandoned their evil ways of looking at things from
limited ego-centric standpoint, whose pride has not yet
1084
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
been subdued --- such seekers, however sincerely and
ardently they may meditate, have little or no chance of
unfolding themselves into their diviner possibilities;
THEY BEHOLD HIM NOT. Though the Self is the nearest,
and therefore, most easily perceivable, yet, all do not see
Him, because of their complete slavery to the
enchantments of the sense-objects.
So far the Self has been indicated as: (1) That, which
cannot be illumined by the known phenomenal sources of
light, such as the Sun, the Moon and the Fire; (2) That
having reached which, none returns from that State of
Perfection; (3) That, of which the individual entities (Jivas)
are as though only a part.
Hereafter, in the following four stanzas the Immanence of
the Lord --- (a) as the All-illumining Light of
Consciousness, (b) as the All-sustaining Life, (c) as the
subjective warmth of Life, in all living organisms, and (d)
as the Self in all the hearts --- is being described.
TO SHOW THIS VERY GOAL AS THE ESSENCE OF ALL
AND THE REALITY BEHIND ALL THESE
EXPERIENCES, KRISHNA PROCEEDS TO GIVE A
SHORT SUMMARY OF THE LORD'S IMMANENCE, IN
THE FOLLOWING FOUR VERSES:
1085
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
12. That Light which is residing in the Sun and which illumines
the whole world, and that which is in the moon and in the fire --
- know that Light to be Mine.
We, who are familiar with the modern scientific
observations must necessarily get rattled a bit when we
read the meaning of the stanza. But without losing our
balance, if we were to quietly ruminate over the statement,
we shall realise that our confusions are only because of the
limitation of our own intellect --- which we have
cultivated by the study of intellectually limited sciences.
In the early classrooms we are told, very scientifically, that
the earth is a portion of the Sun that has got detached
from it and got held within the web of mutual attraction
of the planets, and which has now cooled to its present
temperature. But if we ask the question where the Sun
itself came from, the teacher of science is not only
uncomfortable, but also positively tickled to a justifiable
bad temper! Science can move only in a field where it can
gather the necessary data to calculate and to prove.
But philosophy seeks to satisfy the questionings of the
human intellect regarding the Ultimate Source of all
things, even if the necessary scientific data for such an
attempt may not be available in the laboratory. There is a
definite frontier at which the intellect and its observations,
its logic and conclusions, its reasoning and assertions,
must necessarily exhaust themselves and cry halt. And
yet, the question is not fully answered, for we find an
honest intellect still left wondering: Why! How!! What!!!
1086
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
There science is silent. Where science has fulfilled itself,
and from where onwards its light fails to illumine the
path, there philosophy starts its pilgrimage towards the
Absolute Satisfaction.
Here, the stanza says that the very light which emerges
from the Sun and which illumines the whole world, is the
Light that is emerging from Me, the Infinite
Consciousness. Nay, the light that comes from the moon,
the light that emanates from the fire, are all expressions of
the Infinite Reality, when It expresses through the moon
and the fire.
The manifestations are different because the equipments
are different: the LIGHT in the bulb, the HEAT in the
furnace, the MOVEMENT in the fan, are all indeed
different manifestations, because the bulb, the furnace,
and the fan are dissimilar equipments; but the energy
called electricity is one and the same. In brief,
Consciousness expressed through the Sun manifests
sunlight, expressed through the moon is the moon-light,
and expressed through the dry fuel is the fire --- and yet,
all of them are, in reality, nothing but the Infinite Itself, in
Its varied glorious manifestations. The Infinite manifests
Itself in order to create the conducive environment, in
which alone the world can exist, and wherein, as the Lord,
He can come to express Himself and play His game of
plurality!!
MOREOVER:
1087
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
13. Permeating the earth I support all beings by (My) energy;
and having become the liquid moon, I nourish all herbs.
PERMEATING THE EARTH I SUPPORT ALL BEINGS
WITH MY ENERGY --- Long before artificial manure was
discovered, the earth had, no doubt, a long history; and
some of those eras in the bygone days were, perhaps,
more over-populated than the present. And yet, the earth
continued to sustain life. The capacity of the earth to
sustain life and nourish it, the warmth and the mineral
contents, are all, says the Lord, "MY OWN VITALITY,"
meaning, the same Consciousness which, through the Sun
became the necessary warmth of the atmosphere, while
expressing through the earth, became the 'potential
fertility' of the soil and the 'life-giving secret capacity' of
the earth.
HAVING BECOME THE MOONLIGHT I NOURISH ALL
THE PLANTS --- The same Eternal Consciousness, while
functioning through the moon expresses Itself as moon-
light and fills each plant with its "essence" content. If this
passage was rejected by members of a previous
generation, children of the modern scientific knowledge
will not dare to question it. Modern agricultural science
proves that the planetary organisation, especially the
moon, has got some strange connection with the expected
productivity in agriculture! Recent experiments have been
reported where tomato seedlings sown on the full-moon
1088
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
day and plucked again on a full-moon day were found to
yield a better crop.
Indeed it is accepted everywhere that the paddy
preserved for seeds is not only to be dried in the Sun, but
is must also lie exposed to the moon. The naturopaths
keep some of their preparations --- as also the Ayurvedic
physicians --- exposed to the moon for a certain number of
days, and they claim that the medicines gain certain
curative powers thereby.
All these above facts, touched upon lightly here, should
prove that the declaration in the stanza is not totally
unscientific.
The Sun, the moon and the fire are the Cosmic sources of
all energy in the world, and the very Source-of-the-energy,
from where it flows through these phenomenal
expressions, is the Infinite Consciousness. The
Consciousness functions through the earth and gives the
fields their special capacity to sustain and nourish the
vegetable world, and when the flora grows up, it is again
the same Consciousness, functioning through the moon
and manifesting as moonlight that fills each plant and
fruit with its essential food-value (Vitamins).
MOREOVER:
1089
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
14. Having become (the Fire) VAISHVAANARA , I abide in
the body of beings, and associated with PRANA and APANA,
digest the four-fold food.
ABIDING IN THE BODY OF LIVING BEINGS AS
VAISHVAANARA --- The same Supreme Consciousness
expresses Itself as the warmth-of-life in all living
creatures. That physical structure from which all warmth
has gone, is dead. Metabolism creates the body-heat and
the functions of the inner organisms continue
automatically without any conscious effort on the part of
the individual, so long as LIFE is pulsating in the body.
Here, the Eternal Reality is indicated as that mighty LIFE,
which, when pulsating through the body, manifests Itself
as the 'digestive fire' (Vaishvaanara), which assimilates all
the food taken in.
I DIGEST THE FOUR-FOLD FOOD --- The digestive
power in a healthy living organism assimilates all types of
food. The entire variety of human diet is classified under
four heads in Sanskrit as food that should be (i)
masticated, (ii) swallowed, (iii) sucked, and (iv) licked.
Under these four types, we can embrace all kinds of food,
vegetarian and non-vegetarian, prepared and unprepared,
raw and ripe. All things consumed by the mouth are
digested, assimilated and absorbed because of the
digestive system and the power in the digestive system is
nothing but a manifestation of the All-present Life
Principle.
1090
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ASSOCIATED WITH PRANA AND APANA --- The two
physiological functions of "perception" and of "excretion"
in all living creatures are called Prana and Apana. Here,
however, these terms can be considered in their broadest
general sense. Not only does the Consciousness, as the
'digestive fire,' assimilate the food that has reached the
stomach, but is again Life manifested as the peristaltic
movement (Prana) that receives and rolls down the food
swallowed, through the oesophagus into the stomach.
After digesting, assimilating and absorbing food, it is
again the same Divine Spark-of-Life that gives the
intestines its capacity to throw out (Apana) the undigested
and unnecessary by-products. In short, it is the Lord that
helps us to swallow the food, it is the Lord that assimilates
the food, and it is the Lord again that presides over the
function of eliminating the by-products.
MOREOVER:
15. And I am seated in the hearts of all, from Me are memory,
knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily that which has
to be known in all the VEDAS; I am indeed the author of
VEDANTA, and, the "knower of the VEDAS" am I.
I AM SEATED IN THE HEARTS OF ALL --- If there be
thus an Infinite Omnipotent Power that manifests Itself as
the different things and beings in the world, how can a
seeker make his pilgrimage towards It and meet this Great
Divine? Lord Krishna says that He lives in the Hearts of
1091
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
all living creatures. Here the HEART does not mean the
physiological "heart" but it is the metaphysical HEART.
The term HEART, in philosophy, means "mind which has
been trained to entertain constantly the positive qualities
of love, tolerance, mercy, charity, kindness, and like." A
peaceful, joyous mind, settled in tranquillity, alert and
vigilant to receive higher intimations, is called the "heart."
The Infinite 'DWELLS IN THE HEART'means, though He
is present everywhere the Lord is most conspicuously self-
evident, during meditation, in the HEART of the
meditator.
FROM ME ARE MEMORY KNOWLEDGE, AS WELL AS
THEIR ABSENCE --- The Consciousness Divine has been
declared above as revelling in the heart of every living
creature. This Light-of-Life seems to have no particular
justification to exit since all perceptions are through the
body, all feelings are through the mind, all thoughts are
through the intellect. The Geeta here declares what exactly
is then the special grace of Consciousness. It is the light of
Consciousness that illumines all our experiences in Life.
From this Supreme alone all memories, knowledge, as
well as forgetfulness, come to us. Memory is constituted of
our experiences of the past, stored away in our
understanding which guide our present and future
activities. All education and knowledge that we have at
this moment are memories from the past. Unless we are
aware of these memories, they will not be available in our
present life. Reacting properly to the present sets of
stimuli and thereby gaining fresh and vivid experiences, is
1092
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the process of widening our field of knowledge. And all
these processes are possible only in the Light of Life.
Acquisition of new knowledge presupposes our capacity
to give up our earlier false notions. Imperfect knowledge
gets weeded out when a person is cultivating new
knowledge. A capacity to forget is an essential pre-
requisite in acquiring fresh knowledge. This stanza
explains that all these subjective activities, mental and
intellectual, arise from and are maintained by the
Conscious Principle, the Lord-Himself.
IT IS I THAT IS TO BE KNOWN BY ALL THE VEDAS ---
In all the scriptures of the world, including the various
portions of all the Vedas in India, Krishna says, this Infinite
Consciousness is the one common factor that has been
extolled and adored. To realise this is to reach the goal-of-
life, the fulfilment of existence. The Consciousness that
revels in the hearts of all living creatures is the non-dual
Immortal Reality, the All-pervading and It is the only
substratum for the pluralistic world of experiences.
I AM INDEED THE AUTHOR OF VEDANTA, AS WELL
AS THE KNOWER OF THE VEDAS --- Since
Consciousness alone is the Eternal Reality, and everything
else is a projection upon it, the very essence in everything,
as expressed in the Vedas also, is this Consciousness. The
seeker who listens to the Vedas reflects upon their wisdom,
and ultimately comes to experience the fulfilment of his
1093
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
life, is also at no stage anything other than the same
Consciousness.
In short, it has been said that the Consciousness is the
Light in the Sun; it is the same Consciousness that
fertilises the earth; the Consciousness as moonlight
supplies food-value to the plant-kingdom; it is Truth
Itself, as the body-warmth that presides over the
assimilation of the food within the body, and supervises
the process of life's transactions with the world outside;
and it is the same Light of Consciousness that makes it
possible for us to gain experience, to store away
knowledge, and to replace ignorance with better
knowledge.
The Eternal Principle which thus expresses Itself as the
phenomenal powers --- which, with their activities make it
possible for life to exist on the surface of the earth, and
which helps the higher life to grow and expand into
wisdom --- is the very theme indicated in the Vedas as the
Eternal Reality, and to know it and to bring It under our
experience is to know the Infinite.
Till now the earlier verses have enumerated the glories of
Narayana, the Blessed Lord, as manifested through the
various vehicles such as the Sun, the moon, the earth, the
body, the mind and the intellect. Now, in the following
verses, Lord Krishna points out the True Nature of the
Infinite as the unconditioned (Niru-padhika), All pervading
(Sarva gatah) and Eternal (Nityah). This Infinite Reality
1094
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
transcends all intellectual concepts, such as the finite and
the infinite --- as the perishable and the imperishable.
CONSIDERING THE RELATIVE WORLD OF
EXPERIENCE, BHAGAWAN SAYS:
16. Two 'PURUSHAS' are there in this world, the Perishable
and the Imperishable. All beings are the Perishable and the
'KOOTASTHAH' is called the Imperishable.
Earlier, in Chapter XIII, we had an exhaustive discussion
of the field-of-Matter and the Knower-of-the field. The
discussion we had so far in this chapter must prove that
the Sun, the warmth in the atmosphere, the earth, its
potentialities, the plant-kingdom, and man and his
capacities --- all of them together constituting the field-of-
Matter, are nothing other than the Supreme Itself.
When the Infinite Consciousness becomes the light and
heat of the Sun, the fertility of the earth, the essence in the
plant, the Consciousness in the heart, the faculties of
knowing and remembering, etc., they are all different
forms of Consciousness alone. Thus, the fact that the field-
of-Matter is nothing other than the Spirit Itself was
already demonstrated. The only difference is that the
Spirit, when It has assumed the form of Matter, looks as
though It is subject to change and destruction. Thus the
"realm of Matter" is indicated in this stanza as the
Perishable (Kshara) Purusha.
1095
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the relative field of experience, when we talk with
reference to the inert and perishable world of Matter, the
Spirit is indicated as the Conscious Principle, which is
Imperishable. With reference to one's wife alone is one
called a husband; when I have a son I will become a
father. Similarly, with reference to the perishable and the
changing Matter-envelopments, the Consciousness is
indicated as the Imperishable and the Changeless. The
body changes; from childhood to youth, from youth to old
age; the mind changes in its quality of feelings and
emotions; the intellect expressing differently with each
added knowledge and experience is ever in a state of
change. But one is constantly AWARE OF all these
changes. This Consciousness which has been constantly
recognising and illumining all changes, at all levels, all
through the individual's life, is necessarily changeless.
This Conscious Principle is called Akshara only with
reference to and as a contrast with the Perishable, the
(Kshara).
This Immutable and Imperishable principle of Life is the
Self, common in all living creatures at all times. That this
Self, in the midst of change remains changeless and that
all changes can take place only in contact with it are both
indicated by the metaphor suggested by the term used
here, Kootashah.
DISTINCT FROM THESE TWO --- THE PERISHABLE
AND THE IMPERISHABLE --- UNTAINTED BY THE
1096
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IMPERFECTIONS OF THESE TWO RELATIVE
CONDITIONS, IS THE HIGHEST SPIRIT:
17. But distinct is the Supreme PURUSHA called the Highest
Self, the Indestructible Lord, who, pervading the three worlds
(waking, dream and deep-sleep) , sustains them.
But distinct from all these is the Highest Spirit spoken of
as the Supreme Self. With reference to my own children
alone am I really a father. With reference to my duty or
status I may have yet another name. Similarly, the
Imperishable is a status and a dignity gained by the Spirit
only with reference to the field-of-the-perishables around
and about It, through which It manifests as the various
expressions of Life. When my children have died, or I am
dismissed from my job, I am no more a father, nor can I
any more claim my erstwhile official dignity. But that
does not mean that I am, in the absence of children or
work, an absolute zero, a total non-entity! No. I will exist
as "the son of my father," or in my individual capacity,
though devoid of all my special status and dignity born
out of my relationship with my profession, or with my
children.
When the perishable (Kshara) is transcended, what
remains is not Imperishable (Akshara) but that which
played as the 'Perishable-Purusha' as well as the
'Imperishable-Purusha.' This Pure Spirit (Purusha) is
spoken of as the Supreme Self, who 'PERVADES AND
1097
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SUSTAINS THE THREE WORLDS': "World" in Sanskrit
means 'realm of experience.' The three realms of
experiences in which we eke out our life's returns are the
states of waking, dream, and deep-sleep. The same Self is
the illuminator of the experiences in all the above three
states-of-Consciousness.
There are not three different types of Purushas; according
to the limitations and conditions around It, the Spirit,
appears different in Its manifestations. A pot is in a room;
now the 'pot-space' is a lesser part of the 'room-space,' and
the room-space is only a negligible portion of the 'total-
space.' At the same time 'pot-space' minus the pot, if
understood as "space," is the same space as the infinite-
space. Now, in the above example, pot-space and room-
space are something other than the outer-space, in as
much as, conditioned as they are, they have gathered unto
themselves certain limitations, but the unconditioned 'pot-
space' and the 'room-space' are nothing but the infinite-
space; break the pot, pull down the walls, the space that
was the 'pot-space' and the space that was the 'room-
space' have both become one with the Infinite-space!
The Infinite Consciousness is Itself the perishable-field in
another form, and as the Knower-of-the-Field, the same
Consciousness is the Imperishable Reality in the
perishable conditionings, But when these conditionings
are transcended, the same Self is experienced as the
Supreme Self --- Paramatman.
1098
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SHOWING THE ETYMOLOGY OF THE VERY TERM,
PURUSHOTTAMA, THE LORD SHOWS HOW HE IS
REALLY THE SUPREME:
18. As I transcend the perishable and I am even Higher than the
Imperishable, I am declared as the PURUSHOTTAMA (the
Highest -PURUSHA) in the world and in the VEDAS.
Explaining the very word Purushottama, Lord Krishna says
that Pure Consciousness is HIGHER than both the
'Perishable 'and the 'Imperishable.' The Perishable can
continue its processes of change only against the
Imperishable Truth. It is a scientific fact that no change is
perceptible without reference to a changeless factor. If two
trains are both moving at the same speed no movement is
recognised by perceivers in both the trains. If the changes
in the world of Matter --- the body, the mind and the
intellect are recognised, then there must be a steady
principle that illumines all these different changes. This
constant factor among the Perishing is called the
Imperishable.
This illumining factor gathers its status as the
"Imperishable" only with reference to the "Perishable"
realms. Once the perishable realms are transcended, the
Imperishable amidst them Itself comes to shine forth as
the Pure Infinite, which is the Purushottama. Since the
Truth, Purushottama, is experienced only on transcending
both the 'Perishable' and the 'Imperishable,' It is known by
the term the 'Highest-Spirit' --- Purushottama. This term is
1099
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
used to indicate the Supreme-most Self, both by the
ancient sacred volumes (Vedas), and by the poets and
writers of the world.
NOW THE LORD SPEAKS OF THE FRUITS GAINED BY
ONE WHO REALISES THE SUPREME TRUTH AS
DESCRIBED ABOVE:
19. He who undeluded, thus knows Me, the Supreme
PURUSHA , he, all-knowing, worships Me with his whole
being, O Bharata.
'Undeluded' means, one who has totally detached oneself
from one's wrong identifications with body, mind, and
intellect, and therefore, also from the world of
perceptions, feelings, and thoughts, which these vehicles
provide.
THUS KNOWS ME --- To 'know' here is not a mere
intellectual comprehension, but a deep subjective spiritual
apprehension. That the undeluded one thus experiences in
himself that he is the Purushottama-principle Itself, seems
to be the suggestion here.
Such a man who has fully identified himself with the
Infinite "Me" alone is a true devotee, who 'WORSHIPS ME
WITH ALL HIS BEING'; such a one is the greatest of
devotees, declares the Geetaacharya. Identification with the
beloved is everywhere the measure of love; the greater the
love, the greater is our identification with the object of our
1100
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
love. Therefore, arithmetically, total identification should
be the maximum Love or devotion.
The Highest Spirit, Purushottama, being the Infinite
Consciousness, it is the 'All-knower', inasmuch as
whenever anything is known through perception, feeling,
or thought, it is the Principle of Consciousness that
illumines it. One who has transcended one's matter-
equipments and has successfully sought and discovered
one's spiritual nature as the Infinite Consciousness, that
individual, as the Supreme Awareness, is indicated here
as the "All-knower" (Sarvavit).
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUE NATURE OF THE
LORD IS THE THEME OF THIS CHAPTER AND THE
FOLLOWING CONCLUDING VERSE KRISHNA
EXTOLS THIS THEME, WHICH GIVES LIBERATION TO
MAN FROM ALL HIS FLESH-BORN SORROWS, MIND-
BORN AGITATIONS AND INTELLECT-BORN
RESTLESS-NESS:
20. Thus, this most secret science (teaching) , has been taught by
Me, O sinless one. On knowing this (a man) becomes 'wise' ,
and all his duties are accomplished, O Bharata.
In this concluding verse Krishna says that He has taught
in this chapter 'THE MOST SECRET SCIENCE.' The
spiritual science (Brahma-vidya) is termed as 'secret,' not in
the sense that it should not be given out to anybody, but
that it is a knowledge which cannot, of its own accord
1101
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
come to anyone, unless one is initiated into it by a
'Knower of Reality.'
O SINLESS ONE --- 'Sin'means an act, a feeling or a
thought, which having been perpetrated, entertained, or
thought of, comes back after a time to agitate our bosom
with its insulting taunts and helpless regrets. In short, SIN
is the resultant of the past that comes to demean our self-
estimate and creates in us a lot of mental storm and
consequent dissipation. One who has thus an inner
personality which carries disturbing memories of
undignified acts and cruel schemes, has indeed, a bosom
that is ever agitated and restless. Such a mind-intellect-
equipment cannot consistently apply itself to any serious
and deep investigation into the subtle realm of the Pure
Awareness that lies beyond the frontiers of the intellect.
Therefore, the term 'sinless' in the context here only means
"O STEADY-MINDED, ALERT AND VIGILANT
STUDENT."
He who has realised this PURUSHOTTAMA-STATE of
Consciousness becomes 'wise,' for he cannot thereafter
make any error of judgement in life and thereby create
confusions and sorrows for himself and for others around
him.
The second of the benefits accrued by entering the
Purushottama State is the enjoyment of a complete sense of
fulfilment (Krita-krityataa) --- a total and overwhelming joy
that comes to a man when he realises that he has fully
1102
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
accomplished what is expected of him. This is promised
here in this verse as the reward for the realisation of the
Purushottama-stage.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the fifteenth
discourse ends entitled:
THE YOGA OF THE SUPREME SPIRIT
Om Om Om Om Om
1103
