Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 10
Vibhooti Yoga
The Yoga of Divine Manifestation
The Blessed Lord said: 1. Again, O mighty-armed, listen to My
Supreme word; which I, wishing our welfare, will declare to
you, who delight in hearing me.
The trembling man of indecision whom we met in Arjuna
in the first chapter of the Geeta, has by now developed an
almost incomparable inward equipoise. This inward peace
that comes from an intelligent study of the Hindu
philosophy is vividly brought out in the opening stanza of
this chapter when Lord Krishna himself describes his
disciple Arjuna, as one "WHO IS DELIGHTED" with what
he has heard so far.
No teacher can feel sufficiently inspired to continue his
discourses unless his students nourish his enthusiasm
with interested 'listening'. As one understands more and
more the implications of the philosophy of Vedanta, one
cannot but come to feel an inward glow of peace and
satisfaction. The Lord of the Geeta gets encouraged to
expound his philosophy more exhaustively with a revived
appetite. "AGAIN HEAR MY SUPREME WORD, WHICH
I WILL DECLARE, BECAUSE I DESIRE YOUR
WELFARE."
701
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here Arjuna is addressed as "Mighty-armed" which is a
reminder to the Pandava that he should be a hero in his
inner life to carve out of his present, a kingdom of divine
joy, which is his real heritage! It is evident that the Lord's
discourse is not upon any secular subject, but it is upon
the greater possibilities in man, and on how man can
rediscover them in himself; for, it is said that Arjuna
should listen "TO MY SUPREME WORD, WHICH I,
WISHING YOUR (SPIRITUAL) WELFARE (HITAM)
WILL NOW DECLARE."
WHY THE LORD HAS DECIDED TO CONTINUE HIS
DISCOURSES IS NOW EXPLAINED:
2. Neither the hosts of heaven, nor great RISHIS know My
origin; for, in every way, I am the source of all the DEVAS and
the RISHIS.
Whenever we cannot gather knowledge from direct
experience, we gather it from those who are supposed to
know about it. Even this indirect method of self-education
is not available in Brahma-Vidya, because, as the Lord says
"NEITHER THE HOSTS OF HEAVEN NOR THE SEERS
KNOW MY ORIGIN."
Later on (Ibid. X-5) we will have occasion to understand
what actually the Lord means by the term the "great
seers." It is not the Men-of-Wisdom, explained in our
702
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mythology, the Seven great Rishis starting with Bhrigu
and ending with Vasishtha.
The following is a philosophical explanation of the "Seven
Seers."
When the Infinite is seemingly identified with the Total-
intellect, or Cosmic-intellect (Mahat), and develops
thereby an ego-centric personality of Its own (Ahamkara),
It projects Itself, for Its own joy-transactions, as a world of
sense objects. These sense objects are called the five
tanmatras. The 'Mahat', the 'Ahamkara' and the five
'tanmatras' together constitute the Seven Rishis personified
in the Puranas under different names. These Seven Rishis
together represent the intellectual and the mental life of
man, the EFFICIENT and MATERIAL causes for all
creation.
Devas do not literally mean the hosts of heaven; the word
Deva rises from its rot, meaning, 'to illumine'. The Devas,
therefore, are the "sense organs" which illumine for us the
world-of-objects for our innumerable experiences.
It is, therefore, clear that the Self, the Pure Consciousness,
is "THE SOURCE OF ALL THE DEVAS AND THE
GREAT RISHIS," meaning that the Conscious Principle is
the substratum for both the physical and mind-intellect
life in each one of us. Even though they are thus
sustaining themselves in Truth, they cannot 'KNOW MY
ORIGIN.'
703
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
So the Consciousness, being the very SUBJECTIVE-Truth
in us, can never become an OBJECT-of-perception for the
sense organs, or an OBJECT-of-feeling for the mind, or an
OBJECT-of-knowing for the intellect.
IS IT THEN TRUE THAT NOBODY CAN COME TO
KNOW AND REALISE THE SELF, WHICH IS THE
ORIGIN FOR OUR PHYSICAL, MENTAL AND
INTELLECTUAL LIFE? TO DISPEL THIS FEAR IT IS
SAID:
3. He who amongst the mortals, knows Me as unborn and
beginningless, as the great Lord of the worlds, is undeluded and
is liberated from all sins.
HE WHO KNOWS ME --- Not merely knowing in an
emotional sweep, or even an intellectual comprehension,
but it is a true and full spiritual apprehension, which
comes to one during moments of one's intimate
identification with the Self. The Self is to be realised as
UNBORN, BEGINNINGLESS, THE GREAT LORD OF
ALL THE WORLDS." These three terms, each pregnant
with suggestions to those who know a little of the ancient
traditions in the Hindu philosophical thought, are
generally meaningless to the uninitiated. The world-of-
matter is the realm of finitude, where, each being, or
thing, or experience, has a beginning and an end, a birth
and a death.
704
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Infinite cannot ever be born, inasmuch as It never
expresses as Itself in any of the finite manifestations. The
ghost is born, and therefore, it must also die; but it cannot
be said either that the post has given birth to the ghost, or
that the
post has come to be born out of the ghost. The post was, is,
and shall ever be. The Self is Eternal, and therefore, It is
birthless; everything else is born in the Self, exists in the
Self, and when all things are totally destroyed, they end in
the Self. The waves are born out of the ocean but the ocean
is birthless. Every wave, every manifestation, has a
beginning,
an existence, and an end. But the essence cannot have a
beginning, and therefore, in this stanza here, the Self is
qualified as 'BEGINNINGLESS.'
THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS (Sarva-loka-
maheshwarah) --- The term 'loka' is one of the Sanskrit
words which has a vast range of implications which are
ignored generally by the translators who render it as the
'world.' 'Loka' comes from a root meaning 'to experience,'
and therefore, the world should, in its full import, mean 'a
field for experiencing.' In this sense, we make use of the
word 'loka' even in ordinary, everyday usage: 'the
WORLD of the rich,' 'the WORLD of the under-dog,' 'the
WORLD of the poets,' etc. In its ampler meaning, the
Universe, indicated by the word 'loka,' is not only the
physical world experienced by our physical equipments,
705
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
but it also includes the world of feelings and the world of
ideas recognised, reacted upon and experienced by all of
us in our lives.
Thus, my 'loka' is the "field of experiences" that I revel in
at all levels of my body, my mind and my intellect --- and
it is evident that these experiences can never be mine
unless I am constantly aware of them. This Essential
Factor, pure Awareness or Consciousness, without which
I am dead to the world, with which I perceive the world
and live in it actively, should necessarily be the Presiding
Chieftain that rules with His Grace, my 'loka.'
The Self being the same everywhere, the Atman that rules
my world is the Atman that rules the worlds of all
individuals. The entire universe is the sum total of the
worlds of experience of each individual, and evidently,
the 'ruler' that governs the entire Universe must
necessarily be the Absolute Self Itself. The term 'the Lord
of the worlds' is to be rightly understood thus. The Lord is
not a "tyrant over life" or "a Sultan of the skies," or an
"Autocrat who rules over our world." The Self is the Lord
of our experiences, just as the Sun, in the same fashion, is
the Lord of our daytime world.
HE WHO KNOWS ME AS BIRTHLESS,
BEGINNINGLESS AND AS THE GREAT LORD OF THE
WORLDS, ends his delusion. In and through the grinning
ghost that frightened me, I gain a glimpse of the wayside
lamp-post, and forthwith, I go beyond my delusion and
706
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
find myself released from every fear. In Hinduism, the
concept of sin is not a frightening picture of some horrid
inevitability. Man is not punished FOR his sins but he is
punished BY his sins. Sin is a self-insulting act arising out
of a misunderstanding in the sinner as to his own identity.
When one wanders away from one's own Real Nature as
the Self, identifies oneself with the happenings of the
world and behaves as a mass of repulsive flesh, or a
bundle of throbbing emotions, or a pack of ideas, one is in
a manner, dishonouring one's Godly dignity and divine
status, the One-without-a-second. Such acts and thoughts
chain a person down to a pursuit of the low pleasures
only, never allowing him to rise above and climb the
higher peaks of real Perfection.
On re-discovering the nature of the Self and gaining
thereby a perfect, and complete identification with the
Self, he can no longer perpetrate any more of his past
'sins.' The 'sins' in us are the carbuncles from which we
suffer the pains of our limitations and the sorrows of our
bondage. The moment we understand and live in the
realisation that the Self is unborn and beginningless, and
that It is not concerned with decaying and perishable
matter, we have gained all that has to be gained, and
known all that has to be known. Such an individual of
True Realisation becomes himself the "Lord-of-the-
worlds."
HOW IS THE SELF THE LORD OF THE WORLD?
707
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
4. Intellect, wisdom, non-delusion, forgiveness, truth, self-
restraint, calmness, happiness, pain, birth or death, fear and also
fearlessness, . . .
5. Non-injury, equanimity, contentment, austerity, beneficence,
fame, infamy --- all these different kinds of "qualities-of-beings"
arise from Me alone.
Continuing the general idea that the Lord is the
MATERIAL cause as well as the EFFICIENT cause of the
world-of-plurality within and without an individual,
Krishna is enumerating in these two stanzas the various
qualities expressed by the mind-and-intellect of man.
Ordinarily, when we talk of Creation, we are apt to mean
only the world of physical forms. All the said qualities
indicate a larger comprehensiveness of the term 'Creation,'
and clearly indicate that it means also our mental and our
intellectual lives.
Again, men and beings are usually classified under these
qualities, and each individual is bound up with his own
mental qualities. As the mind, so the man. It is to be noted
that here only the POSITIVE qualities are enumerated.
Following the traditional style of Sanskrit commentators,
we can interpret the second conjunction, the indeclinable
'cha,' as denoting the opposite of these qualities also.
However, the Lord is directly mentioning only the
positive qualities inasmuch as, in a man who has these
708
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
noble qualities, his essential divinity will be more
available for perception.
These different types of emotions and thoughts, which
provide for each individual different patterns of life, and
whip him forward to act and live in the external world
accordingly --- all arise from "ME ALONE." Whether the
ghost be pleasantly smiling, or angrily grinning, or
vengefully threatening, its smiles, grins and threats are all
qualities
that have no other substratum than the post. If the Pure
Awareness were not there to illumine all the qualities in
the bosom, they would have no existence for us.
These qualities are almost a complete classification of the
entire world-of-beings and their fields of experiences, and
therefore, as Shankara observes, we can consider these
two stanzas as an exhaustive commentary upon the Self's
status as the Lord of the worlds (Sarva-loka-maheshwarah).
6. The seven great RISHIS, the ancient four and also the
MANUS, possessed of powers like Me, were born of (My) mind;
from them are these creatures in the world (originated and
sustained) .
The idea which was hinted at in the second stanza is being
taken up here to prove how the Seven Seers, the four
Kumaras, and the fourteen Manus, are all born out of the
709
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Lord's own mind, and they together constitute the
MATERIAL and the EFFICIENT causes of the world, since
it is stated here "FROM THEM ARE THESE CREATURES
IN THE WORLD" born.
THE SEVEN RISHIS --- The personified representation of
the Seven Seers, as found in the Puranas, when understood
"subjectively," are nothing but one's intellect, ego and the
five sense stimuli, which, together, constitute the world
experienced by each one of us (X-2).
Subjectively analysed, it is very easy for us to perceive the
implication of this allegory provided by the Seven-Rishis
picture. We know that when thoughts rise in us, they, in
their individual manifestations, are incapable of
disturbing us. At a certain moment, some desire in us gets
concentrated, and, identifying with it, we maintain it in a
steady stream of dynamic thoughts. Thus dynamised, the
initial thought becomes mighty and powerful enough to
destroy our peace and tranquillity, and projecting itself,
creates the perceptions of and our reactions to the world
of the five sense objects. The thought-stream and its
projections together supply us with both the MATERIAL
and the EFFICIENT causes for our own tiny world of joys
and sorrows, victories and failures, yearning and
fulfilments.
THE FOUR ANCIENTS AND THE MANUS --- Sri
Shankaracharya, in his commentary, reads the stanza as
'THE ANCIENTS, AND THE FOUR MANUS,' in the
710
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
context of a subjective analysis, which is recommended
and ably supported by the next line, wherein the Lord
says that all of them are children of "MY MIND."
It is described in the Puranas, the Brahmaji, the Creator, at
the very beginning of Creation, produced out of his own
mind four eternal boys (Kumaras), Sanatkumaara, Sanaka,
Sanatana, and Sanandana. The creator in us is the life in
us functioning through an 'urge-to-create' in any field.
Whenever the creative urge expresses itself immediately
the factors constituting the subtle-body (Antahkarana)
express themselves and function in full vigour. When the
Creator of the whole Universe comes under the 'urge-to-
express,' he has to maintain a constant Sankalpa, which
immediately produces a channel of "constant thoughts"
creating the stuff for the 'inner-instruments.' This 'bundle
of thoughts,' flowing constantly, functions as the mind,
intellect, ego, and chit. These four factors, comprising the
total inner-instrument, are represented by the Eternal
Boys of Wisdom, born out of the mind of the Creator, at
the very beginning of his creative activity.
Thus, in one and the same stanza, the macrocosmic
(Samashti) and the microcosmic (Vyashti) causes of
Creation have been indicated. Macrocosmically, the Total-
intellect (Mahat), ego (Ahamkara), and the five rudimentary
sense objects (tanmatras) supply the causes for the
projection of the world and its sustenance, while
microcosmically the 'creative-urge' in us gets fulfilled
711
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
through the intervention and play of our inner equipment
constituted of the intellect, mind, ego and chit.
The Seven Seers and the Four Ancients together indicate,
thus, both the efficient and the material causes of the
macrocosmic and microcosmic worlds created.
WHY SHOULD ONE UNDERSTAND THESE
IMPLICATIONS OF CREATION FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE
COSMIC MINDS?... LISTEN:
7. He, who in truth knows these manifold manifestations of My
being (Macrocosm) , and (this) YOGA -power of Mine
(Microcosm) , becomes established in the "tremorless -YOGA "
; there is no doubt about it.
"He, who in reality knows these two, My Vibhuti and My
Yoga," gets established in the realisation of the Supreme.
We find that the terms Vibhuti and Yoga, which appear in
this stanza, are invariably translated as "Manifold
manifestation of beings" (Vibhuti) and "My power" (Yoga).
In effect, although these translations are true, they are not
efficient enough to convey the subtle and the brilliant
connection between the statement and what has been
indicated in the previous stanza. Macrocosmic projection
of a created Universe, through the intervention of the
"Seven Seers," is the Absolute's own Vibhuti, while the
712
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
microcosmic experience of a limited world, through the
intervention of the mind-born "Four Ancient Kumaras," is
the Divine Yoga of the Self in each one of us. Since the Self,
presiding over the destinies of the individual, is Itself the
Absolute that forms the substratum for the entire
Universe, he who realises both the Vibhuti and the Yoga as
divine expressions of the Eternal, realises the Infinite.
That this understanding of the macrocosm and its
influence upon the play-of-life in the field of plurality
should not be merely a professor's book-knowledge, is
indicated here, when Krishna insists that the seeker must
know it "in reality" (Tattwatah). This means that the above-
mentioned knowledge is to be realised in a subjective
experience, and intuitively lived, as "I am the Self."
"When I play through the 'Seven Seers' I PAINT the
Universe, and when I play through the 'Four Ancients' I
LIVE the tearful life of an individual." It is not then very
difficult for us to feel the appropriateness of the statement
in the last stanza that the Rishis, Ancients and the Manus,
all "WERE BORN OF MIND." When the Self, therefore,
detaches Itself from both the INDIVIDUAL-mind and the
COSMIC-mind, It comes to revel in all Its Absolute glory.
Identifying Itself with the COSMIC-mind It becomes the
Creator (Ishwara) CREATING THE UNIVERSE, and
identifying with the individual-mind It becomes the
limited ego (Jiva), SUFFERING THE LIMITED WORLD.
To know this implication and to live up to this is the
TREMORLESS-Yoga" --- wherein a permanent and steady
713
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
establishment in the experience of the Self is assured. As
at many points earlier, Vyasa is making his Divine
mouthpiece use the sacred word Yoga in a familiar and a
daringly novel context, so that the awe and dread which
had gathered round this blessed term may disappear. The
"TREMORLESS-YOGA" is as novel as the various
definitions of Yoga given earlier in different verses of the
Geeta --- the one, single, irreplaceable Bible-of-revolt in all
Hindu renaissance movements.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE TECHNIQUE BY WHICH WE
CAN GET OURSELVES ESTABLISHED STEADILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN THE UNBROKEN EXPERIENCE OF
THE INFINITE AS OUR OWN REAL NATURE?...
LISTEN:
8. I am the Source of All; from Me everything evolves;
understanding thus, the "wise, " endowed with 'loving
consciousness' worship Me.
The difference between the microcosm and the
macrocosm is the difference in the equipments through
which the same Truth, the Eternal and the All-perfect,
expresses. When life surges through the Cosmic-Mind, It
(Ishwara) comes to project out the entire Universe-of-
plurality; and when the same Infinite expresses through
an individual-mind, it (Jiva) projects out the individual-
world. In both these manifestations --- the God-principle
(Ishwara) and the individual ego (Jiva) --- the Essence is
714
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
one and the same, just as, for the manifestation of light-in-
the-bulb and heat-in-the-heater, the energy is one and the
same, i. e., electricity. In electricity, considered as pure
energy, there is neither light nor heat. In the same way, in
the Pure Self, in its Essential Nature, there is neither the
God nor the ego. He who realises this "IN REALITY," we
are told, will become established in the Supreme
Awareness through the "TREMORLESS-YOGA."
We prepare a ball of mud of the required plasticity from a
sample of mud after kneading it properly with water. The
ball of mud is next put on the potter's wheel and roughly
shaped. In the third stage, the pot is finished, dried and
polished. And in the fourth stage, the pots so made are
baked and painted. The mud can certainly insist that it is
the 'origin and essence' of the pot, and that it is only in the
mud that the four stages of the pot's evolution had taken
place and are never divorced from it. This is true for all
mud-pots at all times; none of them has any existence,
growth, or development, without the mud which is the
sustaining material in all of them. So too, the same
Principle in its different manifestations becomes Ishwara
and Jiva.
An individual, whose intellect is soaked with
discriminative awareness --- of the subtle difference
between the cosmic and the individual --- is alone capable
of turning his mind away from the created world-of-
objects, and towards the one and the same Subjective
Reality, both in the Creator and in himself. The attitude of
715
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a mind successfully employing itself in this inward quest
is being indicated here by the pregnant term "with loving
consciousness" (Bhaava samanvitah).
Love, or devotion, is measured by the capacity of the lover
to identify himself with the beloved. In short, love is
fulfilled when identification is complete, and when the
devotee is capable of experiencing in himself that he is
none other than the Infinite Self which, functioning
through the Cosmic-mind, plays the part of the Ishwara,
the Creator, and, which, when functioning through an
individual-mind-intellect equipment, behaves as though It
is the Jiva, the limited ego.
What has been asserted courageously in the previous
stanza has been systematically developed here into a
technique by which the above-mentioned experience can
be brought within the intimate personal comprehension of
every student.
9. With their minds wholly resting in Me, with their senses
absorbed in Me, enlightening one another, and ever speaking of
Me, they are satisfied and delighted.
WITH A MIND WHOLLY TURNED TO ME (Mat-chittah)
--- Only with a kind completely integrated into steady
single-pointedness can the seeker meditate efficiently
upon the Supreme. Single-pointedness is lost if the mind
is entertaining more than one idea. To remember
716
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
electricity in all the bulbs, fans and heaters involves no
deliberate effort; it is the very nature of our knowledge
about it. To remember that all mud-pots are made of mud,
we need not strain ourselves. Similarly, once the intellect
is soaked with a convincing realisation that the Essence
behind the God-principle (Ishwara) and the individual ego
(Jiva) is one and the same, whatever feelings may arise in
the mind or whatever thoughts may arise in the intellect,
it is not very difficult for the Truth-seeker to remain
constantly aware of the Conscious Principle behind them
all and this constant "awareness of the Self" is indicated
here by the term 'Mat-chittah.'
WITH THEIR SENSES ABSORBED IN ME (Mat-gata-
pranah) --- The term Prana is not to be translated merely as
"Vital-air"; it constitutes the five different manifestations
of life available for recognition in any living body. Here,
however, the term Prana is used mainly to indicate the five
sense organs. These organs of perception are the only
peep-windows through which the mind wanders out and
the world-of-objects enters the mind on its return to the
bosom. Vedanta never asks the seekers to retire, or to run
away as fugitives, from the fields of sense objects --- which
can never be possible as long as we are alive. The path of
intellectual pursuit is the path of discrimination, a process
through which we can so regulate and train our thoughts
that, at the impact of any object of the world, it is
immediately reminded of the Eternal Consciousness,
without which the object would not have been illumined
for the mind's experience.
717
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DISCUSSING WITH ONE ANOTHER --- When students
with a common intellectual interest come together and
discuss among themselves their pet subject, they not only
crystallise their knowledge, but often achieve a reassuring
degree of confident knowledge in place of what was till
then some stray information gathered from silent books.
This technique of common discussion has been tirelessly
emphasised in Vedanta in its very definition of Brahma-
Vidya where it upholds it as one of its most important
limbs of sadhana.
A true seeker is he who maintains in himself a constant
remembrance of the Conscious Principle in him ---
whatever be the activities of the mind, or of the sense
organs. He maintains this channel of thinking steadily
through mutual discussions on, and a constant seeking of,
the Atman. Such seekers ultimately experience a
scintillating joy lubricating life's wheels as they roll along
their stony path. In the Upanishads the same idea has been
beautifully put by using a similar pair of words, 'sports'
(kreedami) and 'revels' (ramanti). Here, however, the former
word is replaced by an equally efficient term to indicate
the meaning (tushyanti).
Even while walking the path-of-perfection, Lord Krishna
asserts that the seekers on the "path-of-discrimination"
will come to experience and live a sense of
"CONTENTMENT AND DELIGHT." These two provide
the healthy mental attitude, generating the required
inward atmosphere in which spiritual progress can be
718
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
guaranteed. The discontented, ever-mourning seekers,
painting a miserable picture of mental stagnation and
intellectual destitution, are not the blessed ones who will
gain easy entry into the portals of joyless joy and silent
laughter, the Eternal Goal to be realised.
HAVING REACHED THIS STAGE OF PROGRESS IN
THEIR MARCH, FROM WHERE DO THE SEEKERS GET
GUIDANCE AND STRENGTH TO FULFIL THEIR
PILGRIMAGE?... LISTEN:
10. To the ever-steadfast, worshipping Me with love, I give the
"BUDDHI YOGA, " by which they come to Me.
Withdrawal of one's identifications with the perceived
world-of-objects, or the world-of-thoughts, or the world-
of-ideas, can be successful only when one has discovered
in oneself some other all-consuming thought to serve as
an efficient substitute, yielding a satisfactory quota of
absorbing happiness. The Bliss-Absolute-Self has enough
captivating charm to engage the human attention entirely,
and therefore, to the extent to which an individual gets
attached to the Truth, to that extent he gains detachment
from the painful embrace of the false. This Vedantic Truth
is indicated, when Lord Krishna, as though in one and the
same breath, states "AND SERVING ME WITH
AFFECTION, INVOKING
ME WITH AFFECTIONATE DEVOTION."
719
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
We have already indicated that love means identification.
To the extent the ego identifies with the Self, to that extent
is one a devotee of the Truth, and when one becomes
steadfast in It, one comes really to invoke (Bhaja) the
divinity that is now dormant in the bosom.
To those individuals, who are steadily contemplating
upon the Self in an atmosphere of love, delight and
contentment, identifying themselves with the Infinite --- to
them the Lord promises, "I give that 'Buddhi yoga' BY
WHICH THEY CAN COME UNTO ME."
This term Buddhi yoga already mentioned earlier (II-39) has
been described as "the right knowledge gained through
meditation upon the Infinite Nature of the Self." In the
context of its use here, we may say that a devotee striving
diligently, as explained above, will be blessed with "AN
INTELLECTUAL CONTACT WITH, OR
OMPREHENSION OF" Reality. No doubt, we do not
mean that the intellect can comprehend the Infinite. We
are merely borrowing a familiar phrase from the realm of
finite experiences. As long as what we have
comprehended intellectually is not contradicted by any
other different comprehension, we are capable of
experiencing what we have comprehended, beyond all
traces of doubt. Similarly, the power of an intuitive
awareness of Reality comes only to such seekers in whom
the maturity of a steady and continued contemplation
upon the Self has come about.
720
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When, through the above process of bringing the mind to
quietude, a meditator has succeeded in arresting the
mind's agitations (Vikshepa), and has consequently lifted
the veiling (Avarana) from his intellect, he comes to the
State of Transcendental Experience (Samadhi), which is the
fulfilment of Buddhi yoga.
THROUGH THIS "BUDDHI YOGA" WHAT EXACTLY
DOES THE LORD PROVIDE FOR THE SEEKER?...
LISTEN:
11. Out of mere compassion for them, I, dwelling within their
hearts, destroy the darkness born of ignorance by the luminous
Lamp-of-Knowledge.
A thing existing in the outside world may sometimes be
veiled from our perception because we need certain
favourable conditions for its full perception. In order to
hear a sound, the sound produced must have the
necessary frequency and the sound waves must also reach
the ear-drum of the listener. Similarly, it is not sufficient
that an object be in front of the eyes to give us the
perception of it; it must be bathed in a beam of light, and
only then can the eyes recognise it.
If I am groping in the darkness for a key that is on my
table, and somebody switches the light on, I can say that
he, with his kindly act, has brought me to the key. It is
absurd to assume that the light has CREATED the key.
721
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Following this analogy, the Self that is already existing in
us, now ducking, as it were, behind conditions not
favourable for its cognition, gets unveiled when these
unfavourable conditions are removed. This negative
atmosphere in our bosom that screens the Self is indicated
here by the term "THE DARKNESS BORN OF
IGNORANCE." Even in the darkness of ignorance,
remember, the Self is abiding; only it is not available for
our intimate subjective experience. When the seekers who
have established themselves in the above-mentioned
"constant awareness of the Supreme," master the Buddhi
yoga, they become fit for the final experience of their real
identity with the Self.
Earlier, we mentioned that Buddhi yoga amounts to the
Samadhi-experience, even though there is yet a thin film of
ego-centric experience-of-Bliss. In this stanza, we have a
description of how, from the Savikalpa, the seeker is
transported, unaware, as though by the intervention of
some Divine Grace, into the consummate Nirvikalpa
experience of the Infinite. In fact, upto the Savikalpa alone
is the realm of conscious self-effort, and even the Buddhi
yoga comes "from above" --- meaning, it comes not as a
result of any deliberate action, but is a spontaneous
"partial revelation" when the density of the mist between
the ego and the Self is thinned. The final phase
experienced when the mist of ignorance is completely
lifted is Self-revelation which comes in Its own Light.
722
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A radium-dialled watch is kept on the table in a dark
room. In the enveloping darkness I am searching for the
watch. As I remove the various papers and books that
have accumulated on the table, suddenly I come to
recognise, by its own light, the watch so earnestly sought.
The self-effulgent Truth, when hidden behind the fumes
of ignorance, may, for the time being, appear as though
non-existent. When the enveloping ignorance is removed,
Its own Self-effulgence is sufficient to illumine it.
When the "DARKNESS OF IGNORANCE IS DESTROYED
BY THE LUMINOUS LAMP-OF KNOWLEDGE,' the Self
stands revealed in its own glory as THE One-without-a-
second, All-pervading, and All-full. This act of Self-
revelation is undertaken and performed by the Lord, the
Self, who ever "ABIDES IN THE HEART OF HIS VERY
DEVOTEES." This kindly act of revealing the Self is
undertaken "in a spirit of compassion" --- in fact, towards
Itself. When I am tired of walking, I sit on the roadside in
my pilgrimage --- out of compassion for myself.
This compassion cannot be directly invoked unless the
seeker pays the price for it. In day-time, when I open the
windows of my room, the sunlight, "out of compassion,"
illumines the room for me; and, we know that the sunlight
has neither the freedom to withdraw this compassion so
long as the windows are open, nor has it the capacity to
show its compassion before the windows are opened. In
short, the sunlight is invoked the moment, the object
which obstructs the sunlight is removed.
723
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, when a seeker, through the above-mentioned
processes, comes to deserve Buddhi yoga, and practises it
diligently, he succeeds in removing from himself all the
veils of ignorance which are nothing but his own mental
agitations caused by the cloudiness of his intellect. The
self-effulgent Self then spontaneously reveals Itself, in Its
own light. Lightning needs no other light to illumine it
when it passes from one mass of clouds to the
neighbouring clouds.
The instruction-portion for the highest vocation in life,
viz., self-development and Self-realisation, concludes here,
and yet, Arjuna is not satisfied, and is raising his doubt
here requesting the Lord to help him gain a confirmation
through actual experience.
HAVING HEARD THUS BOTH THE VIBHUTI AND
YOGA OF THE LORD, DESCRIBED SO ELABORATELY
IN THE FORE-RUNNING VERSES, ARJUNA ASKS:
Arjuna said: 12. You are the Supreme BRAHMAN, the
Supreme Abode, the Supreme Purifier, Eternal, Divine
PURUSHA, the God of all gods, Unborn, Omnipresent.
13. All the RISHIS have thus declared You, as also the DEVA-
RISHI Narada, so also Asita, Devala and Vyasa; and now the
same You Yourself say to me.
724
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna confesses that he had already been taught, through
the Vedic passages, that the great seers of old had
indicated the INFINITE, the ETERNAL, through
suggestive phraseologies, such as "THE SUPREME
BRAHMAN, THE SUPREME ABODE, THE SUPREME
PURIFIER, THE ETERNAL BRAHMAN, THE SELF-
LUMINOUS PURUSHA, THE FIRST DEVA, THE
BIRTHLESS AND THE ALL-PERVADING." In all these
cases he had heard them only as attributes of the Truth. So
when he heard in his own presence, the same phrases
used by Krishna, in the first person singular, he, the son of
Kunti, feels lost, not knowing how to comprehend that
Krishna, his charioteer, is the Source of the Whole
Universe!
A practical man-of-the-world as Arjuna was, he needed
more data, and we shall discover that in order to satisfy
this demand, Krishna supplies enough information in this
very same chapter. But, instead of satisfying Arjuna, it
only sharpens his curiosity and compels him to demand
from Krishna an experimental demonstration, which also
is provided by Krishna in the following chapter (Chapter
XI).
The ancient seers mentioned here, "Narada, Asita, Devala,
and Vyasa," cannot be very familiar to the students of the
Upanishads. Vyasa, perhaps, deliberately quotes these
Rishis mentioned in his Puranas.
725
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna acknowledged and recognised these phrases,
indicating the attributes of the Lord, only as empty and
purposeless words, though they had come from accepted
great teachers. His actual surprise was clearly expressed in
his words "SO ALSO YOU YOURSELF REPEAT TO ME."
Here the occasion for Arjuna's staggering confusion was,
how his own contemporary, Lord Krishna --- a living
creature standing right in front of him, whom he knew all
these years, and was even related to --- could Himself be
the Infinite, the Supreme, the Birthless, and the All-
pervading.
Arjuna looks at Krishna with his physical eyes and he sees
only Krishna's physical structure. Krishna has been
declaring Himself as the pure Self throughout the Geeta
and not as a living member of the society. "Sri Krishna
Paramatman" is the teacher in the Geeta and not the son of
Vasudeva, or the lover of the gopis. Arjuna could not
comprehend 'Krishna-the-Spirit,' in his pre-occupation
with 'Krishna-the-friend,' 'Krishna-the-lover,' 'Krishna-the-
dependable man of intellect and diplomacy.' Hence the
Pandava prince's wonderment and confusion.
THE FOLLOWING IS GIVEN TO BRING OUT CLEARLY
THE ATTITUDE OF THE SEEKER IN ARJUNA WHEN
HE ASKS THIS QUESTION:
726
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
14. I believe all this that You say to me as true, O Keshava;
verily, O Blessed Lord, neither the DEVAS nor the DANAVAS
know Your manifestation (identity) .
Here Arjuna exposes himself and expresses his unfaltering
faith in his teacher and confesses "I REGARD ALL THAT
YOU SAY TO ME AS TRUTH." 'Keshava' is "one who
removes all sorrows of those who have surrendered to
him." Even though he accepts as truth all that Krishna
says, he cannot comprehend the significance of the Lord's
declarations. In short, Arjuna admits here that his heart is
satisfied and is overflowing with faith and belief but his
intellect is starved and thirsty.
The thirst-to-know, under which the famished personality
of Arjuna groans, is echoed in the second half of the
second line, when he admits that "NEITHER THE DEVAS
NOR THE DANAVAS KNOW YOUR PERSONALITY."
The 'Danavas' are the sons of Danu, and frequently
challenge the heaven, obstruct the sacrifices, and lead
generally in undivine life. 'Devas' are highly sensitive
denizens of the heaven who are described in the Puranas
as persons who have subtler perceptions, stronger
emotions and mightier intellectual comprehensions than
the mortals have.
Subjectively, 'Devas' stand for the nobler and the higher
comprehensions in us, and the 'Danavas' for the hosts of
negative urges. Arjuna, the son of Kunti, is expressing his
despair that the IDENTITY of the Self can be fixed up
727
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
neither by the subtlest and the noblest of our perceptions,
nor can we apprehend this Self through our 'Danava'-like
challenge to possess, to acquire, to investigate and to
know. Neither the good in us can embrace the Truth, nor
can the bad in us challenge and bring up the Truth as an
opposing force right in front of us. There are only two
methods of meeting another being or thing; either as a
friend or as a foe, either as something that we like or as
something that we abhor. In neither way can we come to
apprehend the individuality, the total personality (Vyakti)
of the Self --- It being the subject, both in Its expression as
an individual (Yoga) and in Its expansion as the cosmic
(Vibhuti).
IF NONE CAN KNOW THE TRUTH, WHY IS ARJUNA
ASKING KRISHNA TO EXPLAIN? WHAT EXACTLY IS
THE SPECIAL QUALITY THAT ENABLES HIM TO
EXPLAIN THAT WHICH NONE ELSE CAN EVEN
KNOW?
15. Verily, You Yourself know Yourself by Yourself, O
PURUSHOTTAMA (Supreme PURUSHA) , O Source of
beings, O Lord of beings, O God of gods, O Ruler of the world.
This stanza indicates how Krishna is capable of explaining
the Supreme which is not known by the denizens of the
heaven or the hoards of the other kingdom. The Self is, of
course, not known as an 'object' through the intervention
of our instruments of knowing, nor can It be apprehended
728
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
as the 'subject' --- either through the best, or the worst in
us. But, at the same time, the Self being Awareness, It in
Itself is Knowledge --- and to 'know' Knowledge, no other
knowledge is needed. Therefore, it is said by Arjuna "YOU
YOURSELF KNOW YOURSELF BY YOURSELF."
In the Sankhyan philosophy, the Spark-of-Life in each
individual is called the Purusha, in Whose presence, the
matter-envelopments constituting Prakriti, become
vitalised. Here Krishna is addressed as 'Purushottama'
meaning "the Self of all selves, the One-without-a-second."
In the Geeta, the term Purushottama is sometimes used as
the 'most glorious of men' and sometimes in the purely
technical usage as the "Supreme Self."
Lord Krishna is now being recognised and glorified by
Arjuna as the Pure Brahman, when he addresses Him as
"THE SOURCE OF BEINGS, THE LORD OF BEINGS,
THE DEVA OF DEVAS, AND THE RULER OF THE
WORLD." The essential stuff in any object is the ruler and
maintainer of its qualities. The quality of gold rules over
all the qualities of various gold ornaments whatever their
shape, design, polish, etc. More than this is the controlling
and the ruling power of the Consciousness in our lives,
inasmuch as, without Consciousness, we know nothing,
can do nothing. An awareness or knowledge of a thing or
an event is possible only when the mental and intellectual
disturbances caused by it are illumined by the Pure
Consciousness.
729
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
AFTER THE ABOVE INTRODUCTORY WORDS,
EXPRESSING HIS SENSE OF WONDER, REVERENCE,
AND DEVOTION, ARJUNA IS NOW EXPRESSING
DIRECTLY HIS INTELLECTUAL DEMAND TO THE
LORD:
16. You should indeed, without reserve, tell me of Your Divine
glories by which You exist pervading all these worlds.
The Prince is convinced that the Lord is the Essence
without which the multiple world cannot exist. At the
same time, when he looks out into the world through his
familiar instruments of the intellect, mind and body, he
recognises nothing but ideas, feelings and objects; and
they are anything but divine.
When a building is illuminated on a ceremonial occasion,
we see many points of light emanating from the
innumerable coloured bulbs of varying intensity, but,
when we are told that all of them are sustained and fed by
the same electricity, it would be quite natural for the
ignorant to demand that he be shown the electricity in
each of its manifestations! As the Cosmic-man (Ishwara),
the Lord is both Transcendental (Vibhuti), and Immanent
(Yoga), in all names and forms that constitute Samsara.
This can be felt by a heart of faith but cannot be
comprehended by the intellect, even if it be sharp.
Naturally, Arjuna asked Krishna for an exhaustive
discourse upon "YOUR COSMIC-GLORY, VIBHUTI, BY
730
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHICH, FILLING ALL THESE WORLDS, YOU EXIST."
Arjuna, being a man-of-action and supremely practical-
minded, wanted to gather sufficient data for his intellect
to ponder over, classify and understand It.
IS IT MERELY INTELLECTUAL CURIOSITY IN ARJUNA
THAT MADE HIM ASK THIS QUESTION?... LISTEN:
17. How shall I, ever-meditating, know You, O YOGIN? In
what aspects or things, O Blessed Lord, are You to be thought of
by me?
HOW AM I TO MEDITATE UPON THEE, SO THAT I
MAY COME TO KNOW THEE? --- The goal of a seeker is
to KNOW the Truth in his own personal experience, while
he is in an intimate identification with It. The Geeta was
advocating, so far, not a life of retirement, for purposes of
quiet meditation, in solitary caves, on the banks of some
river, all alone! Krishna's call to man was a call to duty,
the call of work, the call of living the God-experience in
and through life. Geeta, the scripture, we should not
forget, was declared in the Mahabharata battle-field at a
moment when the world of that time was facing the
greatest known historical crisis, both secular and sacred.
Arjuna has been completely converted into accepting the
Geeta Religion of Right Action. This is indicated especially
when Arjuna addresses Krishna in this stanza as "O Yogin"
--- the greatest Karma Yogin that ever freely lived in the
731
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
thickest of life, yet, never let himself down from the
Consciousness of the Divine Essence.
Moreover, he makes it very clear why he has requested
Krishna to explain "without reserve," His Cosmic-Stature.
Arjuna asks: "IN WHAT FORMS ARE YOU TO BE
THOUGHT OF BY ME?" Even while living life and
meeting its problems, if one were to remember constantly
the Divine Presence everywhere, one must know exactly
where to see It, among the individual objects of the world,
among the combinations of things and in the community
of beings.
STATING AGAIN PRECISELY WHAT HE WANTS
KRISHNA TO EXPLAIN, ARJUNA MAKES IT CLEAR
THAT EVEN IF THE ANSWERS BE RATHER LENGTHY,
HE WILL NOT FEEL TIRED OF LISTENING TO THEM
AND UNDERSTANDING THEM ALL:
18. Tell me again, in detail, O Janardana, of your YOGA -
power and Immanent glory; for I do not feel satisfied by hearing
your (life-giving and so) nectar-like speech.
A student of philosophy --- and for that matter, a true
student of any knowledge --- should have, first of all, an
insatiable thirst to understand, to know, and to appreciate.
Without this appetite, no knowledge can be digested by
the student with profit. This is especially so in the
SUBJECTIVE SCIENCE of self-development. For, here, as
732
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
nowhere else, the knowledge gained is not only to be
digested and assimilated, but lived intensively. Therefore,
anxiety to listen (Jijnasa) has been recognised as one of the
noblest qualities, unavoidable for a fit student in Vedanta,
if he is TO BE ASSURED OF ANY PROGRESS on the
Path-of-Knowledge.
Arjuna, the Pandava Prince, had this noble trait to a large
extent, for he confesses, "I AM NEVER SATISFIED WITH
LISTENING TO THE NECTARINE WORDS OF YOUR
DISCOURSES." No doubt, it is true, Satsanga has a
chastening effect upon all intelligent and interested
listeners. This intoxication, vicariously experienced by the
students when a true teacher discourses upon the Truth, is
only a temporary exhilaration, a passing mood of false
peace, which cannot stand in good stead when the student
is left all alone by himself.
And yet, however volatile it may be, it can enchant the
new initiates, and some, like Arjuna, may become
addicted to it. This state of fascination for hearing more
and more spiritual discourses is amply indicated here.
Though this is not the end, this is a good beginning, no
doubt, and those who feel a fulfilment in the study of
philosophy are certainly much more noble than the
thousands who cannot even stand a philosophical
discourse, discussing the Nature of the Divine!!
THE TIRELESS MISSIONARY IN KRISHNA, WITH
MOTHERLY PATIENCE, ANSWERS ARJUNA:
733
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 19. Alas! Now I will declare to you My
Divine glories, immanent, in their prominence; O best of the
Kurus, there is no end to the details of My extent.
The elaborate and exhaustive reply of Krishna, which
forms the bulk of this chapter, explains the exact identity
of the Self in individual beings and things and in the
combination of things and beings. It must be carefully
noted that in the following stanzas, while he explains his
Immanence (Yoga) and Transcendence (Vibhuti), he is very
careful to indicate two factors at one and the same time:
(1) His Supreme importance in individual things, and (2)
the fact that without Him none of the constituent
members of an assemblage, or of a community, will have
any synchronised existence or organised life.
The word "alas" (Hanta) with which the section opens,
expresses the Divine Master's loving sympathy and
anxious consideration for Arjuna's seeming incapacity to
realise in himself THAT which is ever the nearest to him.
The usual translation "O Kurushreshtha" (Hanta
Kurushreshtha) cannot be accepted without the sacrifice of
a volume of significance inherent that exclamation ---
Hanta meaning "alas."
Even though there is no end to the infinite variety of the
Self's manifestations in plurality --- where all the time It
gets projected out, either through the Total-mind
(Ishwara), or through the individual-mind (Jiva) --- the All-
734
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
merciful One undertakes the impossible, out of His
infinite kindness for His disciple, Arjuna, who has totally
surrendered unto Him. He admits that THERE IS NO
BOUND TO MY EXTENT," and yet, He undertakes to
explain to Arjuna His All-pervading Power-Divine,
"ONLY THOSE GLORIES THAT ARE MOST
IMPORTANT."
In the physical world also it is true that sunlight gets
reflected from all objects equally, be it a dull stone, or a
mirror; but in the mirror, the reflection is more clear, and
effectively brilliant. Similarly, the Lord promises that He
will indicate through very carefully chosen examples, the
vital spots and instances at which the Divinity manifests
itself the clearest.
BEFORE WE ENTER INTO THIS DISCUSSION, YOU
HAD BETTER LISTEN TO THE FUNDAMENTAL
TRUTH, SAYS THE LORD, AND PROCEEDS:
20. I am the Self, O Gudakesha, seated in the hearts of all beings;
I am the Beginning, the Middle and also the End of all beings.
I AM THE SELF THAT EXISTS IN THE HEART OF ALL
BEINGS --- This is a general statement with which Krishna
opens his entire discourse. A real master of research who
is trained well to be a scientific thinker, starts a discussion
upon his pet subject of study and experience by
summarising his entire talk in a general statement. Later
735
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
on, he will work at the warp and the woof of his
descriptions, and at the logical reasoning for the
elaboration of his theme, and will, of necessity, come back
to the same statement at the conclusion of his talks. Here
also we find, in the last stanza of this chapter, how
Krishna concludes with the same thought, more
powerfully expressed, "I EXIST SUPPORTING THIS
WHOLE BY A PORTION OF MYSELF."
If, in the first half of the verse it is declared that Krishna,
as the Self in all, is the essence in the world of multiplicity,
the same idea is expressed in other words, in the second
line of the verse, "I AM THE BEGINNING, THE MIDDLE,
AND ALSO THE END OF ALL BEINGS." The world of
things and beings is essentially a projection of the mind;
the world outside is only the Infinite, misinterpreted by
the finite mind. Therefore, this idea can be understood
subjectively, as referring to the world-of-thoughts also.
Every thought rises from the Consciousness, and when it
dies away, it merges back to leave behind nothing but
Consciousness. There can be no thought where there is no
Consciousness. Later on also we shall find the same idea
forcefully repeated (X-32) and Krishna never seems to tire
of repeating this great Truth.
THE FOLLOWING ARE THE METHODS OF
MEDITATING UPON THE SELF WHILE LIVING
AMONG THE ENDLESS VARIETIES OF OBJECTS AND
BEINGS THAT CONSTITUTE THE WORLD OF
PERCEPTIONS:
736
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
21. Among the (twelve) ADITYAS I am Vishnu; among
luminaries, the radiant Sun; I am Marichi among the
MARUTS; among asterisms, the moon am I.
OF ADITYAS I AM VISHNU --- In the Vedic tradition,
Adityas, described in some places as five, and in other
places as six, are the children born of Aditi. Later on, the
traditional belief considered twelve Adityas, each
representing one of the twelve months of the year. In the
Vishnu-Purana, however, we read that "Vishnu" is one of
these twelve Adityas, and He is described therein as the
most important amongst the whole lot.
OF THE LUMINARIES I AM THE RADIANT SUN ---
Modern physics admits that the Sun is the source of all
energy. Naturally, the phrase stands amply self-explained.
The Self is the source of all energy wherever it is seen
manifested.
OF THE WINDS I AM MARICHI --- In Vedic verses,
Maruts are the sons of Rudra and the Rig Veda mentions
Marichi as the chief among them. In Vedic lore, the Maruts
represent the presiding deity of the storms, wind and
breeze --- in short, air-in-motion.
OF THE ASTERISMS I AM THE MOON --- The Sanskrit
term 'Nakshatras', as used in Indian astronomy, indicates
the asterisms strewn on the Moon's path. Conceiving
exclusively thus the route of the Moon in the Universe, the
737
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
line may be interpreted as expressing the Lord's glory,
inasmuch as, among the asterisms the Moon is the
controller, the regulator; and in splendour, the most
wondrous of all of them.
But we could as well accept the world 'Nakshatras,' in its
common understanding, as the endless twinkling little
stars that we see studded in the night-sky. There are
commentators, who go a step further, and consider the
world as
representing all 'lights of the night.' This also is an
acceptable interpretation, which can convey to us a wealth
of suggestions to ponder over and meditate upon. The Self
is as incomparably glorious, soothing and pleasant as the
moon is in the entire 'world-of-lights' that illumines the
night, from the modest hut to the Parliament House.
It is to be remembered that in this series of TWENTY-
TWO STANZAS, Lord Krishna is trying to supply the
seekers with SEVENTY-FIVE ITEMS of thought for
helping those who are on the Path-of-Knowledge, to
meditate upon and intensify their integration and sharpen
their single-pointedness. These are 75 independent
exercises in meditation.
22. Among the VEDAS, I am the SAMA-VEDA; I am
VASAVA among the gods; among the senses I am the mind;
and I am the intelligence among living beings.
738
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF ALL THE VEDAS I AM THE SAMA-VEDA --- The
bulk of the Sama-Veda is nothing but the essence of the
Rig-Veda and the latter is considered as the most
important of all the four Vedas. In Chandogya Upanishad,
the Sama-Veda has been beautifully glorified Again, in
Sama-Veda, there is the added joy of music, inasmuch as,
the Samans are to be sung in complicated tunes, the
melody and rhythm of which are evidences revealing a
mighty art that has been exquisitely developed by our
ancients. Through the beauty of the comparison, we may
read the Krishna is (I am) the Infinite Essence tuned to
music, as Rig-Veda Mantras are in the Samans.
OF THE DEVAS I AM VASAVA --- Among the denizens
of heaven, Vasava is King Indra. It is interesting to note
that according to the Hindu concept, there is the highest
standard of living imaginable in heaven, but even among
its denizens there are the "haves" and the "have-nots."
Individuals who perform meritorious acts reach heaven to
enjoy the wealth of goodness so acquired, and therefore,
one who has acquired a larger wealth of merits while
living HERE, should necessarily come to enjoy THERE a
subtler joy and a life of greater satisfaction. Of such lives,
the most powerful and mighty, the most splendid and
luxurious life will necessarily be of Indra. The Self is as
Indra among the gods, ruling over the others, controlling
and directing them and organising their lives so that they
may enjoy the highest standard of living.
739
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF THE SENSE ORGANS I AM THE MIND --- The above
phrase that the Self is 'INDRA AMONG THE GODS' itself
contains the subjective idea to all those who are well fed
upon the Upanishadic lore, that It is the mind among the
indriyas. The term 'Indra,' in Sanskrit can also be dissolved
as "the King of the sense organs." We have earlier
mentioned that Devas, since the world means 'to illumine,'
are the sense organs, and, among them, naturally, the
mind is the patron and the controller without which the
sense organs will not have their play in any intelligent
field of activity.
Of all things created in the world, the most magnificent
and wondrous item is the mysterious power, called the
"intelligence," which has not yet been brought within the
understanding of modern scientists beyond certain vague
and fanciful theories.
23. And among the RUDRAS I am Shankara; among the
YAKSHAS and RAKSHASAS I am the Lord of wealth
(KUBERA) ; among the VASUS I am PAVAKA (AGNI) ; and
among the mountains I am the MERU.
OF RUDRAS I AM SHANKARA --- The concept of Rudra,
as the deity of destruction, is to be recognised by every
student of life because destruction is a necessary
precedent to every subsequent construction. The flower
must die to yield its place to the fruit. The fruit must
perish for the seeds to come out. The seeds must rot to
740
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
bring forth the seedling. Thus, in every progress there is a
continuous stream of constructive destruction. This is
recognised by the subtlest thinkers that were ever born
among men, the Rishis, and in their full understanding
they fearlessly respected and adored the blessed deity of
creative destruction --- Shankara
I AM THE TREASURER OF WEALTH (KUBERA)
AMONG THE YAKSHAS AND RAKSHASAS --- The
Chancellor of the Exchequer in heaven is described in the
Puranas as Kubera, a monstrous, ugly creature, three-
footed, fat and short, with a spreading belly, a small head
and eight protruding teeth. The divine cashier is helped
by Yakshas and Rakshasas --- an equally ugly, materialistic,
heartless brood --- in protecting his treasures. It is
interesting to note how the Indian Rishis were typically
against capitalism and how they cartooned the master-of-
wealth in such a grotesque caricature, so ugly that
it cannot bring about even an indulgent smile to our lips.
OF THE VASUS, I AM PAVAKA --- There are eight Vasus
and they are Vedic deities presiding over the seasons. In
Chandogya Upanishad it is described that the MOUTH of
these Vasus is fire; there, the word "mouth" may be
conceived of as the instrument of enjoyment and
experience. Therefore, it means that the Self is the very
source from which we gain all our experiences of all
seasons.
741
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The six seasons which the world outside gives us, and the
two seasons which the mind supplies us with, viz., joy
and sorrow, together constitute the eight seasons
mentioned here. Even the spring-time flowers will shed
tears for us, if, at that time, we are in tragic bereavement,
while even the naked trees of the autumn season will be
quivering with joy for us, if, in that season, we have the
joy of success, full and complete --- thereby the two
internal seasons. All of them are experienced by us only
when we are under the grace of our own Consciousness
within.
OF ALL THE PEAKS I AM MERU --- A mythological
mountain, believed to be the centre of the Universe,
according to ancient Hindu Geography, is Meru. On top of
it, lives the Divine, and below it, lie scattered the Seven
Islands that constitute the world. Meru is conceived as
having an altitude of seven to eight thousand miles and it
is described that from its top, the Ganges flows in all
directions. This statement has made many believe that it
may be the Himalayas --- which is not, of course, very
unsatisfactory. But we would rather believe it to be a
mystical phraseology --- representing some special "field
of influence," having its base in Jambu-dweepa and its
extent rising up to the peak described above, from where
Spiritual Knowledge flows out on all the four sides to
bless all of the islands.
CONTINUING TO INDICATE THE STATUS OF THE
SELF AMONG THE THINGS OF THE KNOWN WORLD:
742
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
24. And among the household priests, O Partha, know Me to be
the chief, BRIHASPATI; among generals, I am SKANDA;
among lakes, I am the ocean.
OF THE HOUSEHOLD PRIESTS KNOW ME THE CHIEF,
BRIHASPATI --- The lord of the planet Jupiter, Brihaspati,
is mentioned in the Rig Veda as Brahmanaspati, which is
self-explanatory of his status, among the hosts of heaven.
He is considered as the spiritual teacher of the celestials.
Similarly, the Lord indicates, "I AM SKANDA' --- the son
of Shiva, the peacock-rider, and the wielder-of-the-spear --
- "AMONG THE GENERALS."
OF WATER, I AM THE OCEAN --- In all these examples,
it is quite clear that the Lord is indicating Himself to be
not only transcendent, but also immanent. Especially, the
last analogy of the series in the stanza proves itself to be a
typical example. No doubt, the waters of Ganga seem to
have no relationship with the waters of the ocean.
Yamuna, Godavari, Saraswati, Narmada, Sindhu or
Kaveri, Tigris or Nile, Thames or Amazon --- the water of
the various lakes of the world, of the ponds of the villages,
in all irrigation canals, individually, is independent and
has nothing to do with the ocean that embraces the world.
And yet, it is a fact that but for the waters of the ocean, all
these rivers and water-pools would have long ago dried
up. Similarly, in the sentient and the insentient beings,
and things of the world, though individually they might
look as if they have no direct relationship with the Infinite
743
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Ocean of Truth, the Lord indicates here that, but for It, the
phenomenal world would have ended its existence long
ago.
STILL ELABORATING THE SAME IDEA:
25. Among the great RISHIS I am Bhrigu; among words I am
the one-syllabled "OM" ; among sacrifices I am the sacrifice of
silent repetition (JAPA-YAJNA) ; among immovable things,
the Himalayas.
OF THE GREAT RISHIS I AM BHRIGU --- Bhrigu is the
chief of the Seven Rishis mentioned earlier in this very
chapter (Ibid., Verses 2 and 5). Bhrigu is the one who
recites the Manava Dharmashastra, wherein he is
recognised as Manu's son.
OF WORDS, I AM THE ONE-SYLLABLED "OM" ---
Words are symbols of sounds to express one's thoughts. A
speaker, with his words, tries to raise in the bosom of his
listeners, a pattern of thought-experiences which the
speaker feels in himself. Thus, the word 'tomato' is the
sound symbol which creates in the mind of all those who
know the 'tomato' the same form-experience. To bless
those who do not react to this word, but stand confused,
the speaker will necessarily try to use a series of words
arranged into sentences, and the sentences will be
properly marshalled to give a full picture of what a
'tomato' is. To the extent the describer can mould the
744
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
form, colour, taste and qualities of the 'tomato' in the
thought-world of the listener, to that extent the listener
also can experience mentally what the speaker is speaking
about. Thus, ordinarily, language is full of such sound-
symbols to indicate experiences and to communicate
thoughts.
If ordinary word-symbol indicate only the finite, the Rishis
thought that they must conceive a word-symbol to
indicate the Eternal. Thus, they discovered the one-
syllabled word 'OM,' which is the greatest mantra in all the
Vedas and traditionally, upto recent times, this has been, in
the spiritual world, the one sound idol used as a prop
(Alambanam) for all early meditators.
OF SACRIFICES I AM THE JAPA --- This universal
spiritual exercise, Japa, is a technique by which the 'Japist'
tries to maintain a constant stream of the same divine
thoughts in his mind. All other sacrifices --- be they on the
"Path-of-Devotion" or on the "Path-of-Action," or on the
"Path-of-Knowledge" --- are ritualistic, or meditative
attempts, for a given period of time, to restrain the mind
in one channel of deliberate thought. As such, in one form
or the other, "thought repetition" of the same species is the
attempt in all Sadhanas. No doubt, Japa is a path in itself,
having an independent existence of its own; but, at the
same time in one form or the other, it is the core of all the
"paths."
745
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, Japa Yajna is glorified here, not only because it is the
essential core of all the other Yajnas but also because it
transcends them all as an independent "Path" in itself.
Unbroken remembrance of the Self is the very experience
of Perfection and the moment of perfect intellectual
tranquillity --- Samadhi.
OF THINGS MOTIONLESS, I AM THE HIMALAYAS ---
The motionless is conceived as the inert, the insentient.
Mud and rocks, trees and plants, birds and animals
intermixed with the splendour of the phenomenal might,
such as whistling storms, tearing thunders, roaring rivers
cascading through silent valleys, still pools of eternal
lakes, faithfully reflecting the blue sky and duplicating
mountain peaks in their love-lorn hearts --- all these
together constitute the picture of all mountains. But, "OF
THEM," the Lord says, "I AM THE HIMALAYAS."
Certainly He gives to the Himalayan ranges a more
glorious and divine status because of their special
significance. Unlike anywhere else in the world, in India,
the Himalayas have the secret peaks where man sat to
rocket his thoughts even beyond the frontiers of his
intellect and did it successfully as was never before done
by any living creature from the beginningless history of
the world.
NOT SATISFIED YET, THE LORD IS VIGOROUSLY
TRYING THROUGH FINER EXAMPLES AND WORDS
TO CONVEY HIS INFINITE GLORY TO THE DATA-
746
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
MONGERING AND WORLDLY INTELLECT OF HIS
WARRIOR-FRIEND, ARJUNA;
26. Among all trees (I am) the ASHWATTHA -tree; among
Divine RISHIS , Narada ; among GANDHARVAS ,
Chitraratha ; among Perfected ones , the MUNI Kapila .
OF ALL THE TREES I AM THE ASHWATTHA-TREE ---
Both in its magnitude and life-span, the Ashwattha tree
(Pipal) can be considered as the "all-pervading" and the
"Immortal," inasmuch as it lives generally for centuries.
The Hindu has learnt to worship it, and there is a
sentiment of divinity attached to it. It is also a fact that the
Ashwattha brings up in our mind fresh memories of the
Upanishadic comparison of it with samsara. Later, in the
Geeta itself (XV-I) we have a mention of the peepal tree as
representing the pluralistic phenomenal world that has
shot up to spread itself like mushrooms of false sorrows
over what is dreamy nothingness.
OF THE DEVARISHIS I AM NARADA --- Of the heavenly
Seers, Krishna describes Himself as Narada, a favourite
figure in our legends. In our Puranas, Narada is described
as a great devotee of Hari; he is not only a great Seer
among the celestials, but he often comes down to the
world to play the deliberate fool and ultimately guide the
deluded mortals to the parlour of heaven. Perhaps
Krishna, himself being a great missionary, entertains a
great respect for Narada, because of his missionary zeal
747
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and enthusiasm. Many are the converts whom Narada has
won for heaven as described in our Puranas. A missionary
cannot but feel a comradeship with another working in
the same field and nothing can create a greater tie of
identification than the similarly of aspiration in two
individuals.
'Gandharvas' are the mythological concept of subtle
entities who constitute the celestial choir, who entertain
the denizens of heaven with their art and music. They are
the 'stars' of entertainment in heaven. Among them,
Chitraratha is the most brilliant.
OF THE SIDDHAS, I AM THE MUNI KAPILA --- These
Siddhas are not magic-mongers. The term Siddha in
Sanskrit indicates one who has "achieved the Goal
(Sadhya)" and therefore, it means the "Perfected One."
Among Men-of-realisation, therefore, Krishna says, "I am
Muni Kapila." The term Muni need not bring into our
mind the traditional picture supplied by illiterate painters
of an aged, silver-haired, almost naked fakir, generally
roaming about where others will not dare to enter, eating
a strange diet, a strange creature of the forests, rather than
a decent normal man of the town. Muni is a term in
Sanskrit derived from the word Manana which is the "art
of reflection." The term Muni, therefore, only means a
thinker; "OF THE THINKERS I AM KAPILA."
Kapila, the author of the Sankhya philosophy has been
here particularly singled out for this great status as the
748
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
best among all thinkers, because the Geeta mainly follows
the Sankhyan-philosophical thoughts.
The Lord uses the framework of thoughts in the Sankhya
philosophy to paint His concept of the One Truth,
Absolute and Eternal, and therefore, Kapila, the promoter
of the Sankhyan school of thought, has been given the
special glory of being compared with the Lord Himself.
FEELING THAT HE HAS NOT DELIVERED THE
GOODS YET, THE LORD CONTINUES:
27. Know Me among horses as 'UCCHAHI-SHRAVAS, ' born
of AMRITA; among lordly elephants, the 'AIRAVATA' and
among men, the King.
The Pauranic-story of the churning of the Milky-Ocean by
both the gods and the demons for the purpose of getting
out of it the Nectar is very famous. Two of the products
that came up during the churning process were the
Winged-horse, mighty and powerful, called the Ucchahi-
shravas, and the White-elephant, Airavata. Both of them
were presented to the King of the gods, Indra. Altogether,
it is described that thirteen such tempting objects of might
and glory presented themselves during the churning.
749
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
28. Among weapons, I am the 'thunderbolt' ; among cows I am
'KAMADHUK' ; I am 'KANDARPA' , the cause for offspring;
among serpents I am 'VASUKI. '
OF WEAPONS, I AM THE THUNDERBOLT --- The
weapon called 'Vajra' is an item in the divine artillery
which can never be shattered. The Vedic legend explains
how a great seer, Dadheechi, offered his own rib-bone for
the construction of this secret weapon to annihilate a
demon who was threatening to shatter the peace of the
heavens.
OF COWS I AM KAMADHUK --- This strange animal
called Kamadhuk, from which we can milk all our desires,
whatever they be, is also one of the early by-products that
rose up during the churning of the Milky-Ocean.
OF ALL THE CAUSES OF OFFSPRING, I AM
KANDARPA --- Cupid, the good of love of the Indian
concept, is conceived of as a mischievous boy, chubby and
lively, ever carrying with himself his bow-of-smile, with
five flower-tipped arrows, each meant to smother one
sense-organ!! The suggestion is a biological truth.
Procreation is not merely an animal act of insemination, or
a vegetable-act of cross-pollination, but it is, according to
the Science of Sex (Kama-shastra) in India, a fulfilment of
all passionate urges that express themselves through all
the sense organs. A philosopher is a perfect scientist and
as such he has none of the false shyness, which is
generally expressed by immoral people when they pose
750
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
themselves as sandal-coated puritans. Vedantins and
teachers, when they talk of sex-life, are as much brutally
open as the professors are in a medical college.
Of all the causes of offspring, the Lord declares, "I AM
CUPID," who in himself, as the lord of love, represents, in
the field of sensuality, the total satisfaction of the physical,
mental and intellectual sheaths in man.
OF SNAKES, I AM VASUKI --- The serpent 'Vasuki,' is
described in our mythology as ever living on Shiva's ring-
finger, as an adornment. Though small enough to become
a ring on the finger of the Lord, it was the 'Vasuki'
Serpent, who volunteered to serve as a rope in the
churning process of the "milky-ocean." This naturally
reminds one of the Upanishadic declarations, that the Truth
is at once the "minutest of the minute," and "the greatest of
the great." Naturally, it is very apt that the Lord declares
Himself to be "Vasuki among the snakes." The term 'Sarpa'
is to be rightly understood, in contrast with the Nagas,
mentioned in the next stanza. Sarpas are single-hooded;
while Nagas are multi-hooded.
CONTINUING IN THE TUNE, THE SINGER-DIVINE
SINGS OF HIS OWN SONGFUL GLORY:
29. I am 'ANANTA' among NAGAS; I am 'VARUNA'
among water deities; I am 'ARYAMA' among the ancestors;
and I am 'YAMA' among controllers.
751
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF THE NAGAS I AM ANANTA --- "Nagas" means "the
many-hooded serpents." Of them, the thousand-hooded
Sesha Naga is the one that has been described as forming
the "bed" for Lord Vishnu to recline in His "Yoga-sleep."
Here Krishna only means that, among the many-hooded
serpents, He is the mightiest and the most divine, because
He is the very Substratum upon which Vishnu, the
Sustainer, and Brahmaji, the Creator of the multiple
world, recline and function.
OF THE WATER DEITIES I AM VARUNA --- ' Varuna' is
a Vedic conception of the Spirit governing the waters, the
third of the five great elements. Deifying the elemental
forces in the phenomenal world, was the method of
adoration and worship in the early Vedic period. It was
only later, that we started the Pauranic-tradition of
humanising gods and got into the muddy pool religious
differences, sectarian prejudices, and credal warfare,
between colonies of ignorant folks, gathered round a
Jerusalem Master or a Vrindavana Boy, or a Mecca
Messenger. Varuna is conceived of as a being, half-fish and
half-man, almost something like Arnold's Merman! He is
the Ruler of the Oceans and the Lord of the Waters.
OF THE PITRIS, I AM ARYAMA --- In Hinduism, death is
one of the experiences in life when the subtle-body
chooses to leave permanently its present residence within
a given physical structure. The mind-intellect-equipment,
maintaining a separate ego-centric concept in itself,
752
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
continues its existence and it is commonly called 'departed
soul' or 'ancestor.'
These 'departed souls' live together in a world of their
own, called the "world-of-the manes" (Pitriloka). We have
already discussed the Vedic concept of the six children of
the twelve Adityas, each presiding over a month of the
year. Of these, Aryama is the ruler of the world-of-the-
ancestors.
OF THE CONTROLLERS, I AM YAMA --- "Yama" is the
mythical Lord-of-Death, the Chief Messenger of the
Annihilator. In India, we worship the terrible, the sad, and
the tragic also, because, to us God is the Substratum for
both the good and the bad, for the pleasant and the
unpleasant. We are not satisfied by any theory of
compromise by which we reject, in God, any association
with what we do not like.
Whether we like it or not, the Principle-of-Death is the
governing factor that controls and regulates life, and, at
every moment, prepares a progressive field for creative
developments everywhere. The childhood must die before
youth can express itself. I must leave my high school in
order to enter the college. Step by step, I must die in order
to be born into the next step. Progress in itself is a partial
picture of life; it is only a squint-eyed vision of life's total
dynamism. Every development is preceded by prior
destruction. Annihilation, thus contributing to positive
progress, is called "Death's own creative art."
753
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
No new thing can be created unless correspondingly we
also destroy that which existed before. We arrive at this
assertive but logical conclusion when we sufficiently
digest the observed physical law of the world that "no two
things can ever remain at one and the same period of time
occupying one and the same space." When a painter paints
a flower, he not only pours his colour on to the canvas to
paint his subject, but his creative art is a constant
destruction of the surface coating that was earlier given to
the canvas!
Thus, when life is viewed in its totality, there is as much
importance for the "Principle-of-Death" as for the very
"Principle-of-Creation."
But for Death functioning intelligently at almost the same
speed as the rate of Creation, there would have been an
inordinate flood of things in life; and life itself would have
been choked by its own magnitude and number. If Death
were not there, the great-great-great-grandfather of our
great-great-great-grandfather might still be living, even
now, in our own present two-roomed apartment! Even
when there is a slight rise in population, the entire balance
and political peace in the world get shattered. What will
not happen, if Death were not as sincerely serving us as
the Creator? Indeed, of all the Controllers, Death alone is
the Chief and the analogy given here is irreplaceable and
supremely apt.
754
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IN A SPELL OF PLEASANT ENTHUSIASM THE LORD
CONTINUES:
30. I am 'Prahlada' among DAITYAS, 'Time' among
reckoners, the 'Lord-of-beasts' (Lion) among animals, and
'Vainateya' (Garuda) among birds.
I AM 'PRAHLADA' AMONG THE DAITYAS --- The Story
of 'Prahlada,' very famous among the Hindus, is the story
of a boy-devotee who, with adamantine faith and firm
devotion, challenged his father Hiranyakashipu in defence
of his own faith in Hari, and stood many a trial and
persecution from his father.
AMONG RECKONERS I AM 'TIME' --- The logicians
form among themselves a staunch group of Hindu
philosophers, and they not only support the concept of
pluralism, but also challenge the very existence of the
God-Principle. They have, through their purely
intellectual deductions, arrived at the final conclusion that
Time is THE Eternal Factor, and the individual mind-and-
intellect are instrumental causes to split It up and see in It
the play of the past, the present, and the future. According
to them, it is this "play of the mind" that bombards Time
and makes It look as though It were finite and
momentary. Perhaps Vyasa had this concept in his mind
when he tried to bring this analogy to express the Infinite
Substratum supporting the finite multiplicity.
755
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
There are some commentators who rather accept this
analogy as a simple-looking direct statement; and,
according to them, Time, which is beginningless and
endless, is the ultimate measure of all things in the relative
field.
AMONG BEASTS, I AM THE LORD OF BEASTS AND,
AMONG BIRDS, I AM THE SON OF VINATA --- The
majesty and grandeur, the dignity and "manliness" of the
lion among animals, make him the Royal Lion. Its flight,
its powers of perception, and the altitudes to which it can
climb, make Garuda --- the King of birds.
31. Among purifiers, I am the 'wind' ; among warriors, I am
'Rama, ' among fishes, I am the 'shark' ; among rivers, I am the
'Ganges. '
OF CLEANSING AGENTS, I AM THE 'WIND' --- No
antiseptic or sanitary equipment is as efficient to clean a
place as the Sun and the wind. If the wind alone is
indicated here it is because of Vyasa's perfect knowledge
that wind can rise only when the Sun is hot. Where there
is constant wind, there the Sun also must be available; in a
cave there can be neither sunlight, nor movement of air.
OF THOSE WHO ARE WIELDERS OF WEAPONS, I AM
'RAMA' --- The hero of Ramayana, Sri Ramachandra was
delineated by Valmiki, the first poet in India to use
metrical compositions and write out a full-fledged Kavya,
756
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
very elaborately, of a "perfect man" in all aspects of his
existence: perfect as a son, as a husband, as a brother, as a
friend, as a fighter, as a teacher, as a ruler, and even as a
father. Such an all-round perfect one --- his perfections
shining out all the more against the background of
seeming imperfections and extremely irritating and
confusing circumstances --- should necessarily be the
noblest hand that ever wielded an honest bow to shoot out
the most effective arrows!
OF THE FISHES I AM THE 'SHARK' AND OF THE
RIVERS I AM JAHNAVI --- The story goes that Saint Jahnu
drank the Ganges dry, and later, for the redemption of
man, let her out to flow through his ears! The concept of
the Ganges, we have indicated earlier, is a symbolism,
freely used by the Hindus, to represent the "spiritual
culture" of India. The wealth of the Rishi-knowledge, as it
reaches a seeker, at the seat of his meditation, at first
makes him swallow and dry it up. "Drinking at the
fountain of Knowledge," "to satiate the thirst for
knowledge," etc., are usual expressions in almost all
languages of the world that have some slavery to the
Mother of all Languages, Sanskrit.
Here the stream of knowledge is described as having
flown out through Jahnu's ears; it is indeed a brilliant
poetic concept to connect the term Shruti (heard), which
means the contents of the Upanishads, comprising what the
Masters declared to the world and what the disciples
"heard" from them. In India, teachers come from time to
757
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
time to reinterpret the Ancient Wisdom in the context of
their own age, only after having gained their own
personal experiences of Vedic Truth-declarations. Without
the stamp of realisation, no teacher worth the name will
dare come into the world to propagate the old Truth in
new language.
Of the many names by which the sacred river Ganges is
known in India, this particular name has been chosen here
in order to emphasize the above-mentioned special
implications.
AMONG FISHES I AM THE 'SHARK' --- the shark is the
most dangerous fish in the ocean. So among fishes,
Bhagawan declares Himself to be the 'shark.'
AND ALSO:
32. Among creations, I am the beginning, the middle and also
the end, O Arjuna; among sciences I am the Science of the Self
and I am the logic in all arguments.
OF CREATIONS, I AM THE BEGINNING, AND THE
END, AND THE MIDDLE TOO --- Here there is an echo
of the general statement with which the Lord started His
discourse earlier in the chapter (X-20), for enumerating
His infinite glories. However, therein He had explained
how He was the Essential Stuff in all individual beings;
758
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and here it is a more universal statement by which He
indicates how He is the Essence in all Creation.
No substance can ever remain divorced from the essential
stuff of which it is made. No gold ornament can be made
without the metal, gold. No wave from the ocean can be
packed separately for the Himalayas. No mud-pot can
exist, divorced from the mud. The MATERIAL-cause is
the unavoidable essence in all the names and forms, and
nothing can ever remain divorced from its own essential-
essence. By the above statement, the Lord is indicating
that He, as the Self-in-all, is "the beginning, the end and
the middle too" of all things in the Universe. The names
and forms have arisen from Him, are supported by Him,
and they can only merge back into Him when they are
destroyed.
The science that explains that Knowledge-Principle,
without which no other 'KNOWLEDGE OF THINGS' is
ever possible, and which, playing upon the field-of-things,
accomplishes our knowledge of them, should necessarily
be the Science-of-all-sciences, the best Knowledge. In
sunlight, all objects are illumined. Sunlight reflected upon
the non-luminous objects of the world makes them
perceptible. Naturally, the Sun is the "eye of all eyes," the
source of all perceptions. Similarly, the "Science-of-
Spirituality" is explained as the "Science-of-all-sciences."
OF ARGUMENTS I AM 'VAADA' --- The term Pravadatam
used here, should be understood by us, according to
759
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Shankara, as the various forms of arguments. Three types
of approaches are often used in all discussions, in all
walks of life. In Jalpa, the attempt is to smother the
opposition and its arguments by vehement criticism and
bitter rejoinders, spoken with an overbearing arrogance in
assertions. In the case of Vitanda, the champion of
discussion mercilessly criticises the arguments of the
opposition, exposing by means, fair or foul, both the real
and the imaginary fallacies in their line of arguments; the
aim beings to destroy the edifice, built by the other. The
third, Vaada, is the technique of discussion by which the
one arguing is trying to read the letter and the verse as
directly as possible, with the object of coming directly to
truth, without indulging in any hair-splitting arguments.
It is evident, therefore, that both the former techniques
(Jalpa and Vitanda) are only strategies to weaken the
enemies, while the actual thrust into the enemy lines and
the ultimate real conquest is only through Vaada.
FURTHER:
33. Among letters I am the letter 'A' ; among all compounds I
am the dual (co-ordinates) ; I am verily, the inexhaustible, or the
everlasting time; I am the (All-faced) dispenser (of fruits of
actions) having faces in all directions.
OF THE ALPHABET I AM THE LETTER 'A' --- It is very
well-known that, without the help of vowels, words
cannot be pronounced. Of all languages, Sanskrit is
760
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
particularly sweet because of the preponderance of the 'A'
sound in it. In fact, every letter in its combination is to be
pronounced in Sanskrit with the sound of 'A' added to it
to lengthen it to its full sweetness. This, as it were,
lubricates the words, and consequently the language has
no back-firing disturbances of rattling nuisance or
disgusting hoarseness. Because of this smooth run of the
'A' sound in every letter, there is a melody even between
words and a lingering echo between sentences. In fact,
after a long chanting of a Sanskrit text in a hall, there is,
for the sensitive, a perceptible atmosphere of soothening
music in the air that can lull all the agitations of the
human mind.
The sound 'A' is not only the essence in each letter of a
word --- not only does it transcend, or overflow the
sentences and flood the very atmosphere --- but it has
itself the first place among the alphabets in all the
languages. Realising these implications, the Upanishads
declare that the 'A' sound is the essence in all speech.
OF ALL COMPOUND WORDS, I AM THE PAIR --- One
of the Sanskrit forms of compounds is the "pair"
(dwandwa) in which the essential components co-ordinate
with each other in the newly formed compound word.
According to Sridhara, perhaps the only commentator
who tried to give us the why of this analogy, the dwandwa-
method of combining words is very important among all
the other types, because of this easy and direct co-
ordination of its components. In the context of the usage
761
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
here, the Self and the non-Self are as though mixed up
together, and they constitute the world-of-perceptions
experienced by us; but, to the discriminate, the component
parts are as distinct as the dissolution of a dwandwa
compound is to an educated man.
I ALONE AM THE INFINITE TIME --- Earlier (X-30) also
there was a mention that "OF RECKONERS I AM TIME."
There the finite time was mentioned, while here, as a
contrast, the Infinite and the Absolute Time is indicated.
In short, both these statements put together mean that the
Self is the Substratum for both the Absolute Concept of
pure-Time, and the finite experiences of each moment. But
for the awareness of each fraction of time, the total
concept of Time is impossible. Here "I am IMMANENT in
each individual unit-of-time, and I am TRANSCENDENT,
to serve as a substratum for the total-Time."
I AM THE SUSTAINER --- Acharya Shankara comments
upon this term and concludes that the Self is the sustainer
of mental impressions, and therefore, of the particular trait
in a given individual which determines how he will react
to the world outside.
FACING ALL QUARTERS AT ONCE --- This term has
been exhaustively described earlier by us (IX-16) where it
was described that the Self is not only "ONE IN ALL, BUT
IS ALSO DIFFERENT FROM ALL, AND, IN EACH, IT
FACES EVERYWHERE." The entire implication of that
stanza is to be read into this simple-looking phrase,
762
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"Facing everywhere" (Vishvato-mukhah). In all perceptions,
whether physical, mental or intellectual, there is the grace
of the Consciousness which is the Self, and therefore, the
phrase is quite self-expressive.
CONTINUING, THE LORD SAYS:
34. And I am all-devouring Death, and the prosperity of those
who are to be prosperous; among the feminine qualities (I am)
fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, firmness and
forgiveness.
I AM THE ALL-CONSUMING DEATH --- Death, the
leveller, brings even the sceptre and the crown to the level
of the begging bowl and the staff. Every existing thing
maintains its separativeness from all others only during its
lifetime, due to its individual relationship with things and
beings other than itself. After death, the wise and the fool,
the good and the bad, the strong and the weak, the ruler
and the ruled --- all come to dust, levelled into a
uniformity that recognises no distinction within itself.
I AM THE SOURCE OF ALL THAT IS TO BE --- The
Supreme is not merely the destroyer of all, reducing them
into a lifeless commonality but, He is, certainly, the source
of all new creations that are to come in the future. To
conceive destruction, without taking into consideration its
unavoidable accompaniment, i. e., the new construction, is
but to insist upon a partial viewpoint. In a total and
763
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
complete vision-of-life, taken as a whole, we find that the
so called destruction is only a transformation, or
modification, of the existing form of an object, or scheme
of things, into something dissimilar and varying.
Destruction leaves no total blank anywhere. When we
view a wave separately, we may say that, after playing for
a moment on the bosom of the ocean, it has destroyed
itself, but if we view it from the standpoint of the ocean,
for each wave which appears to have been destroyed,
there are innumerable new waves that rise up, unnoticed
by our limited powers of observation.
We find that Krishna is gathering these ideas against the
contrast contained in his immediately prior statement,
Altogether, the line stresses that the Infinite playing Itself,
ceaselessly, and in repeated succession, the game of both
destruction and construction, is, in fact, what we call as
the finite-Universe.
FAME, FORTUNE, SPEECH, MEMORY,
INTELLIGENCE, STEAD-FASTNESS, AND PATIENCE,
AM I, OF THE FEMININE QUALITIES --- The Sanskrit
terms conveying these abstract nouns are all feminine in
gender. Maybe the Lord means that if ever we find these
qualities in women, we can perceive a clearer flicker of
divinity than anywhere else. Again, the philosophical
content of the line is perfect, and beyond all criticism. It is
not said that the person having these qualities is divine.
Whoever be the person, and whatever be his past, when
764
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
on occasions he expresses these qualities, we can perceive
a clearer vision of Life's glory THROUGH HIM.
In short, these are the qualities which, when manifest,
create such adjustments in the inner equipments in man,
that we can perceive, through him, more clearly the
awesome vitality of Life's surge. As a transferred epithet,
Lord the Self declares that among the feminine qualities, "I
am any one of these, or all of them put together."
THE LORD AGAIN GIVES FOUR MORE INDICATIONS
TO MAKE THE SELF-INTRODUCTION CLEAR TO
ARJUNA:
35. Among hymns also I am the 'BRIHAT-SAMAN' ; among
metres 'GAYATRI' am I; among months I am parts of
December-January (MARGA-SHIRSHA) ; among seasons I
am the 'flowery-spring. '
OF THE SAMANS I AM THE BRIHAT-SAMAN --- The
songs of the Sama-Veda are called the Samans. These
hymns are all in different metres, and they are to be sung
in different tunes. It is no easy task, and the students who
can sing the Samans well had to spend years of practice at
the feet of their Master. Of all the metres that are met with
in the volume of the Sama-Veda, the most difficult and
complicated is the metre called 'Brihati'; and the Samans
composed in; the Brihati-metre are called the 'Brihat-sama.'
765
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF ALL METRES I AM GAYATRI --- Talking of metres
Bhagawan seems to have all of a sudden remembered that
there are different varieties of metres and, of them, Gayatri
is considered as the most divine and extremely powerful.
Gayatri is a metre composed of three lines, each fulfilled in
eight syllables. This metre is held in India in great esteem,
and with an added sense of divinity, because the most
famous hymn, glorifying the Sun (Savitru), chanted by all
Brahmins, in their morning and evening ablutions, is
composed in this metre.
Of all the metres none has been so uniformly glorified
everywhere as "Gayatri," and the mantra has had so far the
privilege of being chanted by so many devotees,
continuously for such a long number of years, in any other
religion in the world.
OF THE MONTHS I AM THE MARGA-SHIRSHA --- This
corresponds to parts of the English calender months of
December and January which are the months in India,
each year, when people do not think of the fatiguing
summer which is to arrive soon and they have stopped
complaining about the wet monsoon.
OF THE SEASONS I AM THE FLOWER-BEARING
SPRING --- Spring, with its colourful message and
fragrant songs, gives a thrill to all prospects wherever one
may turn in India. Flower-valleys clothe the hills. Crops
cover the field. Tanks and pools get strewn with lotus and
766
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
lilies. The meadows roll out green carpets of grass. There
is an air
of celebration and festivity in the hearts of all, and in
order to crown the joyous spirit in the world, the moon
seems to dress herself in more glory than usual.
NOT ONLY AM I TO BE RECOGNISED AMONG THE
MAJESTIC AND THE DIVINE, AMONG THE
BEAUTIFUL AND THE CHARMING, BUT ALSO
AMONG THE LOWEST OF THE LOW: I AM WHAT I
AM: FOR, LISTEN:
36. I am the gambling of the fraudulent; I am the splendour of
the splendid; I am victory; I am the industry (in those who are
determined) ; I am the goodness in
the good.
OF ALL THE DECEPTIVE GAMES I AM THE DICE-
PLAY --- The Geeta contains the discourses given to
Arjuna, (the royal warrior, a Prince of that time) by
Krishna, in a great missionary spirit, to help the Prince to
re-discover the vitality of his own religion --- Hinduism.
The attempt of the Geeta is, therefore, to re-orient the
Hindus about Hinduism. A missionary cannot bring about
this re-orientation successfully, unless the spirit of our
scriptures is explained to the common folk in their own
language. To Arjuna, the example given here is the most
767
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
striking. For, his entire life had been a series of tragedies
which he had to suffer because of his elder brother's
irresistible weakness to play the dice. No other example
would have delivered the goods to Arjuna as efficiently as
this one.
To modern students, this may not strike as very effective
since dice is not a game very popular with us just now.
But the substitutes are very easily recognised.
SPLENDOUR IN THE SPLENDID AM I --- At the same
time, a seeker, who is ready to make use of this portion for
meditation as it should be, will easily understand that the
Shastra has said almost nothing. The splendour in a
splendid object has not the qualities of the object from
which the shine comes out. The splendour, in itself, has no
qualities even --- it is merely AN EXPERIENCE. To
facilitate that "experience," the mind borrows the light to
illumine the magnitude and the glory of the object, but the
splendour itself has nothing to do with the ingredients or
constituents that together give rise to the experience of the
splendour in our bosom. In short, as Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa once said, "Truth, no doubt, is Light, but it
is 'light' without its properties."
I AM VICTORY; I AM EFFORT, I AM THE GOODNESS
IN THE GOOD --- As explained above, here also it is these
qualities, nay, the "experiences" lived in the presence of
these qualities, that gives us an occasion to live the Self.
These qualities connote a certain mental condition created
768
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
by the very special type of its thought-vibrations. When
these are sustained for a long period, the bosom becomes
quiet and still. The reflected glory of Awareness becomes,
in such a bosom, almost as glorious as the Reality and,
therefore, as we said earlier, here too, by employing a
transferred-epithet, THE VERY QUALITIES ARE
DECLARED AS THE SELF.
We should not forget that these FIFTY-FOUR items of
analogy, given in this chapter to indicate "THE ONE IN
THE MANY" are all meant to be as many items of
contemplation, to be meditated upon by all sincere
seekers. This is not an OBJECTIVE narration and, as such,
no true student of the Geeta can ever expect his education
to be complete unless he understands the true meaning of
these stanzas in his SUBJECTIVE experience.
STILL IF YOU NEED ELABORATION, ARJUNA, YOU
MAY HAVE SOME MORE. LISTEN:
37. Among the VRISHNIS I am 'VAASUDEVA' ; among the
PANDAVAS, (I am) 'DHANANJAYA' ; also among the
MUNIS I am 'VYASA' ; and among the poets I am 'USHANA,
' the great Seer.
OF THE VRISHNIS, I AM VAASUDEVA --- Among the
Yadavas, the ancestor Yadu had a son Vrishni. All the
descendants of Vrishni together constitute the tribe called
the 'Vrishnis.' In this tribe was born Vasudeva as the great-
769
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
great-grandson of Vrishni. Vasudeva married Devaki, the
sister of the Mathura-tyrant, Kamsa, and to her was born
Krishna. As the son of Vasudeva, the Lord is called
"Vaasudeva."
OF THE PANDAVAS, I AM DHANANJAYA --- Just as
Krishna was the mighty one that had given pride and
glory to both the Yadavakula and the Vrishni-clan, because
of which they have a glorious existence in the memory of
man, so too among the Pandavas, He again was the soul-
giving factor, but for whom, the five brothers would
perhaps have achieved nothing. The term Dhananjaya
literally means "the winner of wealth." Generally, this
term is considered as a title of Arjuna, and therefore, this
portion is usually translated as "I AM ARJUNA, AMONG
THE PANDAVAS."
OF ALL THE SAINTS I AM VYASA --- This is not an
unfair passage of self-advertisement thrown in by Vyasa
himself, the author of the Geeta. Vyasa was a pen-name
which came to symbolise the new style of literature that
was discovered and introduced into the realm of
philosophical and religious writings of that age. The style
was revolutionary, for, till then, philosophical literature
was in mantra-form --- "thoughts packed into small
language-capsules." With the Puranas, a new style was
initiated and developed, where elaboration was the
motive and repeated over-emphasis of the fundamentals
was the general technique. This was innovated by Krishna
770
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Dwaipayana under a suggestive pen-name, Vyasa,
explaining in itself his own literary art of elaboration.
Thus "OF ALL THE MUNIS, I AM VYASA" should
suggest that of all the men of reflection, the Lord is He,
who is behind the stupendous work that stands today
under the title 'Puranas.'
OF THE SEERS, I AM USHANA --- Nowhere do we find
any mention of this seer in the available popular books.
But Anandagiri somehow identifies Ushana with Shukra,
though he too does not explain how he identifies these
two together. The planet Venus, also called Shukra, was
the son of Bhrigu, and the preceptor of the Daityas. Shukra
is called Kavi in the Rig Veda.
In the Upanishads, Kavi means a seer of the Vedic mantras.
Men of inspiration, declaring their experiences, without
ego-centric awareness, were called Kavis; later on the term
deteriorated to mean writers of poetry, who too, at the
sight of the spectacular Universe got themselves lifted
from themselves and seemed to enter into a realm of their
own brilliant notions, from the caves of which they sang
their harmonious rhythm of poetic cadence. Here,
however, it is used in the original meaning as a seer.
FURTHER, IF I MAY ELABORATE, I AM, SAYS THE
LORD:
771
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
38. Among punishers I am the 'Sceptre' ; among those who seek
victory, I am 'Statesmanship' ; and also among secrets, I am
'Silence' ; and I am the 'Knowledge' among knowers.
OF THE CHASTISERS, I AM THE SCEPTRE --- The ruler
and the ruled must both prevail in the State, if they desire
progressively to push ahead the standard of living in the
various communities. The law-giver must see that he
governs by enforcing the laws. In the function of the
government, the governor will, of necessity, become the
punisher of the unsocial members of the community, who
are tempted, in their selfishness, to disobey the existing
laws in the community. The ruled, in their loyalty and
reverence to the existing laws, generally succumb to the
punishments meted out to them by their rulers. But, in
fact, who is that who really gives the powers, to the King
or the President, to punish the misbehaving individuals?
After all, in modern states, individuals have no right to
take the law into their own hands.
The King wields the sceptre, which is the symbol of his
power to punish. To the President in a democratic
institution, the sanction to punish is given by the public
will of the people. In the policeman at the street-corner,
the power to arrest is attached to his uniform. A King
devoid of his sceptre, a President who has been thrown
out, or a dismissed policeman --- none of them has any
longer the power to chastise the wicked. Naturally,
therefore, "OF ALL THOSE WHO PUNISH," the Lord
says, "I AM THE SCEPTRE." Without the symbol of the
772
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
social sanction, no individual in the community has any
right over the others. After all, be he a King or a President,
be he a policeman or a judge, all of them are in themselves
only members of the community, but they play the part of
guarding the security of the community, because of the
special privileges they possess due to the status of their
office.
OF CONQUERERS, I AM STATE-CRAFT --- That a mere
physical conquest is no victory at all, is the repeated
declaration of all history text-books. No nation,
community, society, or individual can, in fact, be
considered as having conquered merely because of the
force that has smothered their enemy, or because of the
might that is standing guard over them. The conquest of a
community can be complete only when the conqueror has,
through intelligent administrative policies, brought the
conquered to identify their culture and thought-patterns
with his own. If the conquerors are not capable of
converting the conquered, or getting themselves
converted to the cultural values of the conquered, the
conquest is never complete. This is an open secret to every
student of history. After the military conquest, through
statesmanship alone, can real baptism come, and this
alone can bring the conquered permanently under the will
of the conqueror. "I AM STATE-CRAFT" by which all
conquerors are really conquerors.
OF THINGS SECRET, I AM SILENCE --- Secrecy is
maintained in and nourished by silence. When a secret is
773
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ventilated in open discussions, it is no longer a secret.
Thus the very essence of a secret lies in silence. So too, it
may be noted that the Knowledge of the Self is described
in our text-books as "the secret of secrets," because it is not
generally known. This great secret is also experienced,
and the divine experience is maintained and enjoyed,
sustained and nourished, as well as fed and grown, only
upon the deep inner silence. Of all secret things, the Lord
is the deep and unbroken Silence!
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE KNOWER AM I --- The
wisdom of the wise is not the wise themselves, and yet, it
is not anything different from them. The Self is not the
body, and yet, we cannot say that the body is anything
different from the Self, which is All-pervading. The
envelopments of matter and their worlds of experiences
are all the aura of glory that shines out around the Self.
The knowledge in the knower or the wisdom in the wise,
is the expression of the Glory Divine, because of a certain
pattern maintained among the inner personalities in the
individuals concerned.
SUMMING UP ALL THAT HE HAD SAID SO FAR IN A
BEAUTIFUL PERORATION, THE LORD SAYS:
39. And whatsoever is the seed of all beings, that also am I, O
Arjuna; there is no being, whether moving, or unmoving, that
can exist without Me.
774
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
I AM THAT WHICH IS THE SEED OF ALL --- In all the
above descriptive phrases, indicating through analogies
the nature, place and function of the Self in the scheme of
the perceptible world of forms, thoughts and ideas, it was
constantly suggested that the Self is the "Source of all
creation." In order to hammer this idea into the dull-
witted so that no student of the Geeta might overlook and
ignore this wonderful idea which is the essence of all
Knowledge-spiritual, Vyasa, again and again, makes
Krishna repeat this essential truth, in a hundred different
suggestive expressions.
The analogy of the seed and the tree is an inexhaustible
theme for the meditators to contemplate upon. Under
favourable conditions, the dormant life-content in the seed
can manifest itself, and, ere long, the germinated seed can
grow out to inconceivable heights and may thereafter look
as though it has no relationship to the very seed from
which it has sprung up. One who is viewing only the
finite world of plurality --- and mourning under the
sledge-hammer of change and constant death --- may not
find in Samsara anything to remind him of the Divine,
Infinite and Blissful, as the Source from which the finite
and sorrowful Samsara has burst forth into expression.
The 'seed-condition of the Universe' is equivalent to the
dormant condition of the tree before its manifestation
among the two lobes of the dicotyledonous seed. Under
favourable conditions, of course, the primary-shoot and
the root-system will emerge, one ascending upwards to be
775
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the tree and the other burrowing down into the soil, to be
the roots. The entire Universe of names and forms, in its
condition of dormancy, remaining in seed-form, is the
"state-of-pralaya," conceived by and accepted in our
Upanishads. This cosmic dissolution becomes more
intelligible to us when we notice it happening in
ourselves. In the state-of-sleep, our individual
temperament, character, capability, education, culture,
decency, etiquette, etc., all are in a condition of dormancy.
In short, in sleep our personality-peculiarities remain in a
seed-condition. When these vasanas, after an interval of
restful poise, get impatient to express themselves, they
emerge, and when the conditions are favourable, each of
them manifests itself fully.
The restful state of the TOTAL-mind-intellect, and
therefore, of all the vasanas in all of us in their condition of
rest, would be the TOTAL-pralaya and, at that time the
whole Universe merges back to become the "seed." This is
an illuminating example of the poetic way of expression
used by all our ancient seers. This pregnant condition of
the potential energy, which, after a time and under
suitable circumstances, will emerge to express itself, is
termed by the brilliant seers of Upanishads as the State-of-
Hiranyagarbha. To translate this marvellous term as the
"Golden Egg" is one of the blasphemies unconsciously
committed by the Western translators who have thereby
outraged the beauty of our scriptures. "The womb of all
things and beings," is all that is indicated by the term,
Hiranyagarbha.
776
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Lord is here identifying himself with the Total-causal-
bodies of the world, meaning the "total-vasana" in all the
creatures, and therefore, as Ishwara, He declares that the
Self is the One-great-seed from which the Tree-of-Samsara
has emerged and will, in future, emerge for an infinite
number of times.
By the statement "I AM THE SEED OF THE UNIVERSE,"
the students of the Geeta might, during their reflection,
come to a wrong conclusion altogether, inasmuch as in the
outer world the seed itself dies to become the tree.
Similarly, the Lord, while creating the world, might have
destroyed Himself! To remove this misconception,
Krishna says here, "NONE CAN EXIST WITHOUT ME,
NEITHER THE MOVING, NOR THE UNMOVING."
Not only is the Lord the Seed of the Universe, but even
after its germination and growth, the 'tree' is also
sustained by the Self. The ocean is the 'seed,' no doubt, of
all waves, that arise on the sea's surface. And yet, when all
the waves germinate as it were, and grow up, none of
them can stand apart from the Source, from which they
arose. Where there is no ocean, no waves can stand, and
wherever there are waves, they cannot sustain themselves
except upon the grace of the ocean.
The cosmos rises up from the PRINCIPLE OF
IGNORANCE that seemingly veils the Truth. This avidya
(ignorance) also exists, drawing its potencies, however
delusory they may be, from the Total-Source of all
777
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
projections. This IGNORANCE of the Self, we know, is the
'seed' from which all the experienced worlds of the
Universe have risen up. If the Awareness in us, Absolute
and Eternal, were not to 'illumine' the very IGNORANCE
for us, the ignorance-produced sighs and sorrows, and the
perceptions of plurality will not at all be available for us;
we would not have been aware
of them.
Thus, just as water is the cause for starting the
germination in the 'seed,' and again, it is water alone that
can nourish and sustain the tree, even after the tree has
expanded itself to its greater dimensions, so too, the
Divine Self, which, by its magic-touch, thrills the seed of
samsara to germinate and thrive, is Itself the nourisher and
the sustainer of its dimensions at all times.
When we are told that ten sample-pieces of ornaments
have all emerged from one mass of gold, and when this
statement is reinforced by a pertinent codicil that, without
gold, none of these sample pieces can ever exist by itself
even for a moment, it becomes evident that all of them are
nothing but gold. Drawing a parallel, the Lord tells us that
He is the very seed from which the entire multiple
Universe has risen; and this partial statement of truth is
complete when it is amended by the statement in the
second line that "NONE CAN EXIST WITHOUT ME."
Lord Cotton can say, "all the samples of cloth that are
manufactured and used in the world have come from Me":
778
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
then it will be only true if Lord Cotton completes his
statement by saying, "No sample of cloth can ever exist
without Me, the Cotton-Essence."
DRAWING TOGETHER THE VARIOUS LINES OF
ARGUMENTS MADE SO FAR, KRISHNA NOW WINDS
UP THIS SECTION OF HIS DISCOURSE IN THE
FOLLOWING THREE VERSES:
40. There is no end to My Divine Glories, O Parantapa; but,
this is but a brief statement by Me of the particulars of My
Divine Glories.
THERE IS NO END TO MY GLORIES --- These
enumerations of the transcendental glories of the Eternal
were actually started in this chapter, in a cry of intelligent
despair at the magnitude of the task and at the frailty of
language to express them all. And yet, out of sheer love
for the disciple, the Eternal Master in Krishna took the job
in hand and tried to make the best of a bad job. No pot-
maker can ever indicate to an enquirer, the "mud essence"
distinctly in each of the existing pots and congratulate
himself in the end that he has exhausted all the pots that
were, are, and shall ever be. It will be foolish vanity to
hope to succeed in such a hopeless endeavour. And, in
fact, it is not necessary also. If, in ten or twenty specimens,
the Knower-of-the-Essence indicates to the seeker, the
"Essential Stuff" in each distinctly, as separate from their
names and forms and other attributes, it should be
779
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
possible for the seeker to recognise for himself the Essence
when he meets the next specimen.
In this chapter, the Lord has given to Arjuna and over his
shoulders to the entire generations of Geeta-students who
may listen to Him in the world, the above FIFTY-FOUR
instances, wherein the play of the Infinite, as recognised
through the apparent veils of matter, has been shown. By
now, any student who has meditated sufficiently upon
those instances, must have educated his mind fully to
discover for himself the One Infinite behind the finite
multiplicity.
In utter despair at not being able to exhaust the infinite
varieties of the pluralistic phenomenal world, Krishna
declares that "there is no end to the 'rays' of My glory
when I, being resplendent in My Absolute Perfection,
shine out in my self-effulgence."
If this knowledge was already with the Lord, why did He,
as a spiritual teacher, bluff His disciples all along in a
futile attempt to reveal Himself through the finite forms?
Why this deception by the Divine? Why disappoint the
students after straining them so long? Is this the general
trait of all the religious teachers, prophets, seers and
masters?
The answer to such accusations against the technique of
religion is that --- "there is no other way"! A medical
college student is asked to do a series of operations, upon
780
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a dead body, that has become cold last week-end!! This is
no bluff; but, it is true, for all the careful and efficient
surgery, the "patient" dead as he is, will not start his life
again. Such training on the dumb objects is necessary to
give the student the required experience before he can
start his independent activities in the profession.
Similarly, here too, the Lord provides Arjuna with some
specific examples in order to teach him the ART OF
SEEING THE UNSEEN THROUGH THE SEEN.
This intention in his heart is clear in his own confession in
the second line: "BUT, BY BRIEF EXAMPLES ONLY
HAVE I DECLARED MY DIVINE GLORY." The Lord has
not exhausted Himself; but He chooses a few effective
examples to educate the mind of His listeners. Those who
have ardently meditated upon these examples, will learn
to recognise the Infinite in all its unending resplendence
enthroned in the bosom of every finite form.
IN SHORT, THE LORD SUMMARIES ALL THAT HE
HAS SAID SO FAR:
41. Whatever it is that is glorious, prosperous or powerful in
any being, know that to be a manifestation of a part of My
splendour.
The above examples have made a frail attempt to indicate
the glories of the Lord, but in no sense can those
descriptions be considered as having defined the Truth.
781
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
However, we have been given an idea that the Divine, the
Imperishable, can be detected in the realm of the undivine
and the perishable, if we look for it with discriminative
judgement. From the above examples it becomes clear that
the Lord is present in all names and forms, revealing
Himself as the glorious, or the great, or the mighty aspect
in all things and beings.
Here, Krishna directly summarises what exactly
constitutes the Divine Presence in the world of plurality,
and provides Arjuna with an acid test in knowing it.
Whatever is great, or glorious, or mighty is nothing but
the expression of a ray of the Lord's own Infinite
Splendour. This is no doubt, a wonderful summary of the
above mentioned FIFTY-FOUR assorted items. Each one
of these examples is a clear-cut instance, indicating the
Lord, either as the Great one in the whole species, or as
the noblest and the most glorious thing, or happening, or
as the most mighty among all that is powerful.
This indication was given expressly to facilitate Arjuna's
recognition of the IMMANENT glory of the Lord in the
things of the world. It can be equally useful for us,
students of the Geeta, in seeking and perceiving the play
of the Infinite among the finite and the changing
phenomena of names and forms.
IN THE END, PANTINGLY CONCLUDING THE
ENUMERATIONS, THE LORD SAYS:
782
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
42. But, of what avail to thee is the knowledge of all these
details, O Arjuna? I exist, supporting this whole world by one
part of Myself.
In an inspired surge of friendliness and love, though
Krishna, in all haste, promised that He would explain "His
expression in the individual" (Yoga) apart from the
description of "His glory as the Cosmic man" (Vibhuti), He
Himself realised, whilst trying to indicate Himself object
by object, the impossibility of exhausting the treatment.
Infinite are the total number of things and beings in the
Universe, and it is never possible to exhaust all of them
one by one. With a cry of despair, and yet in an attitude of
extreme love for his disciple, Lord Krishna brilliantly
summarises this chapter in this closing stanza.
WHAT WILL IT AVAIL THEE TO KNOW ALL THESE
DIVERSITIES --- In fact it is useless to explain the presence
of the Infinite in every finite form. It is impossible for a
pot-maker to show the mud in all the existing pots in the
world; nor can any one indicate the ocean-aspect in every
wave in the sea. All that we can do is explain to the
student the art of recognising the mud aspect in a few pots
so that the student can independently come to recognise
mud in all existing pots. It is never possible for a
mathematics teacher to exhaust all the examples, but the
student is taught the art of solving problems through a
limited number of typical examples, and thereafter, the
783
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
student, all by himself, gains the capacity to solve any
similar problem independently.
I, WITH ONE PART OF MYSELF, SUPPORT THIS
WHOLE UNIVERSE --- In philosophical usage, the term
Jagat means "all the fields of experiences which man has,
as a physical body, as a psychological being and as an
intellectual entity." This would mean that the Jagat is the
sum-total of the world perceived by my senses, plus the
world of my emotions and sentiments, plus the world of
my ideas and ideologies. The entire field that is
comprehended by the sense organs, the mind and the
intellect, is to be understood in its totality as Jagat. In
short, this term conveniently embraces, in its meaning and
import, the entire "realm of objects."
The declaration here in the last line, therefore means that
the total world-of-objects is supported, tended and
nourished by a quarter of --- meaning, a portion of --- the
Subject, the Self. Krishna, as the Self, naturally declares
here that the whole Jagat is supported by a portion of His
glory. The statement has yet another philosophical
implication, inasmuch as it declares that there are in the
Truth vast portions which are uncontaminated by the
disturbances which we call Jagat. No doubt, in the
homogeneous Truth, there cannot be distinctly separate
portions of different features; however, this is a kindly
method of indicating a transcendental idea with the
terrestrial words of finite language.
784
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the tenth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF DIVINE GLORIES
We have already explained the Term 'Vibhuti' during our
discussions in this chapter. This becomes a Yoga inasmuch
as students, earnestly following the path, would try to
attune their mental perception and intellectual
comprehensions so as to recognise the greatness, or the
glory, or the might in the things and situations, and
recognise them as a pencil of the Divine ray in themselves
emerging from the glorious effulgence of the Self, to peep
through the manifold finite embodiments.
Om Om Om Om Om
785
