Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 16
Daivasura Sampad Vibhaga Yoga
The Yopga of Divine and Devilish Estates
The Blessed Lord said: 1. Fearlessness, purity of heart,
steadfastness in the YOGA -of-Knowledge, alms-giving, control
of the senses, sacrifice, study of the SHASTRAS, and
straightforwardness . . .
As we read the opening stanza we are reminded on the
twenty VALUES of life, that were described earlier by
Lord Krishna in His Divine discourse (XIII --- 8 to 12).
Herein we find an almost exhaustive list of the noble
TRAITS in a cultured man living the spiritual way-of-life;
a life wherein he accepts and lives those twenty VALUES
of life, while meeting the work-a-day world. And in the
enumeration of these qualities, FEARLESSNESS
(Abhayam) comes first. Fear is generated in one, only when
one is in a field which is clouded by 'ignorance.' Fear is the
expression of Avidya. Where there is 'Knowledge' there is
fearlessness. By placing this quality of fearlessness at the
head of the list, with the unsung music of sheer
suggestiveness, the divine Acharya is indicating that true
ethical perfection in one is directly proportional to the
spiritual evolution attained by the individual.
1104
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PURITY OF HEART --- No amount of external discipline
can supply the student the positive dynamism that is the
very core in all moral living. The Geeta preaches a
dynamic religion, militant both in theory and practice. The
Divine Charioteer is not satisfied by a tame generation of
passive goodness. He wants the members of the perfect
Hindu society not only to live among themselves the
highest values of life, but also to burst forth with the
positive glow of righteousness and bathe the entire
generation of men in the light of truth and virtue --- virtue
that implies honesty of intentions and purity of motives.
STEADFASTNESS IN THE YOGA-OF-KNOWLEDGE ---
This ethical purity at the level of the heart cannot be
brought about when the human mind is turned outward
to the flesh. Only when the mind is constantly in unison
with the Infinite Song of the Soul, can it discover in itself
the necessary courage to renounce its low appetites,
clinging attachments and the consequent foul motives
GURGLING from within itself. Devotion of Knowledge
(Jnana-Yoga) is thus the positive way to persuade the mind
to leave all its low temptations. When a child is playing
with a delicate glass curio, to save the precious object, the
parents generally offer it a piece of chocolate, and the little
child, anxious to get at the chocolate, drops the precious
thing down. Similarly, a mind that is awakened to the
serener joys of the Self will, naturally, never hang on to
sensuous objects and their fleeting joys.
1105
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ALMS-GIVING (CHARITY), CONTROL OF THE SENSES
AND SACRIFICE --- These three are now the techniques
by which an individual successfully tunes up his inner
instruments of knowledge in order to discover the
required amount of "steady devotion to Knowledge."
Charity must come from one's sense of abundance.
Charity springs only from a sense of oneness in us ---
oneness between the giver and the recipient. Unless one is
able to identify oneself with others, one will not feel this
noble urge to share all that one has with others who do
not have it. Thus Daana is born out of a capacity to restrain
one's instincts of acquisition and aggrandisement, and to
replace them with the spirit of sacrifice, and it consists in
sharing with others the objects of the world that one
possesses.
If charity (daana) develops in one the capacity to detach
oneself from the wealth that one possesses and share it
with others who are poorer, then we can say that control
of the sense-organs (dama) is the application of the same
spirit of sacrifice in one's personal life. To give a complete
licence for indulgence to the sense-organs is to waste,
unproductively, the total human vitality. To economise in
the expenditure of energy through the sense organs in the
fields of sense-objects is to discover an extra amount of
untapped energy. This energy can be made use of as the
motive power behind the mind and intellect that is set on
a flight to the higher realms of meditation. To keep the
mind turned up to the Self, a subtle energy is called forth,
and it will be discovered within ourselves when we
1106
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
control our sense excesses. Without dama and daana the
pilgrimage to Truth is merely a dream.
In the Vedic period, SACRIFICE (Yajna) was the day-to-
day devotional ritualism that the average man of spiritual
seeking diligently practised. Without this regular prayer-
cum-puja --- which is the substitute for Yajna available for
us --- control of the sense-organs will be impossible, and
without this control, the spirit of charity cannot come. In
the absence of both daana and dama, spiritual experience of
the Self, recognition of the Divine within us, is impossible.
It is interesting to note that each subsequent term in this
list is logically connected with the one indicated
immediately before.
STUDY OF THE SCRIPTURES (Swaadhyaaya) ---
Traditionally, this term indicates regular study of the
scriptures. Study of scriptural literature daily, in
measured quantities, will provide the necessary
inspiration to live the divine life in our day-to-day
existence. But, scriptural study is indicated here by a very
significant term, which in Sanskrit suggests that the study
of the scriptures should not be merely an intellectual
appreciation, but as the student reads the text-books, he
must be able, simultaneously, to observe, analyse and
realise the truth of what he is studying within his own life.
Regular studies, coupled with regular practice (Yajna),
will give us the courage to live in self-control of the sense-
organs, which in its turn will supply us with steadiness in
meditation for realising the Highest.
1107
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ASCETICISM (Tapas) --- All conscious self-denials at the
body level, whereby an individual reduces his
indulgences in the world outside, gains more and more
energy within himself, and applies the new-found energy
for the purpose of self-development, are called Tapas.
UPRIGHTNESS (Arjavam) --- Crookedness in thought,
emotion and general conduct has a self-destructive
influence upon the personality. Actions belying one's own
true intentions and motives, convictions and aspirations,
realisation and discrimination will result in the
crookedness of one's personality. He who is indulging in
this way-of-life will thereby develop in himself a split
personality and will soon lose the glow of efficiency and
be impoverished in the powers of personal grit.
In short, in this very opening stanza of the chapter, while
enumerating the qualities of a "Divinely good" man, we
find a definite scientific connection among them. Ethical
values and moral beauties described in Hinduism are not
arbitrary declarations of an imaginative Saint or a
melancholy prophet. They are built on the rocky
foundations of reason and experience. Sincerely pursued
and consciously lived, they contribute to a better
expression of the diviner possibilities in man which
generally lie dormant. Ethics in India are not, by
themselves, a passport to heaven, but are a preparation for
a fuller unfoldment of the divine contents in the bosom of
man.
1108
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
MOREOVER, HERE ARE LISTED THE MENTAL
CONTENTS OF THE GODLY:
2. Harmlessness, truth, absence of anger, renunciation,
peacefulness, absence of crookedness, compassion to beings, non-
covetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of fickle-ness . . .
Continuing, Lord Krishna enumerates the mental contents
of the godly type of men.
HARMLESSNESS (Ahimsa) --- It does not consist so much
in not causing bodily injury to beings in the physical
world, as in not harming any living creature in the world
around from the realm of thought. Physical ahimsa is
simply impossible. To continue living, some kind of
physical harm or the other has to be brought about; it is
unavoidable. But even while bringing about unavoidable
disturbances around ourselves, if our motives are pure
and clean, the harm so wrought is not regarded as causing
injury.
TRUTH (Satyam) --- We have already discussed this virtue
while explaining the last term in the previous stanza
"uprightness."
AN EVEN TEMPER (absence of anger --- Akrodha) ---
Sometimes it is rendered as 'angerless-ness' which is not
very happy. A better rendering would be the capacity to
check, at the right time, waves of anger as they mount up
1109
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in our bosom, so that we do not manifest anger in our
actions. It will be almost unnatural to expect the mind to
become incapable of anger. But no emotion should be
allowed to overwhelm us to such a degree as to render us
almost impotent. This anger arises out of an insufferable
impatience with others. In short, Akrodha does not mean
'without anger' but only 'keeping, as far as possible, an
even temper.'
SPIRIT OF RENUNCIATION (Tyaga) --- In this stanza also
we find, as we noticed in the previous stanza, that there is
a sequential order strictly followed in the development of
thought from term to term. If without respect to Truth, we
cannot live in the spirit of ahimsa, so also without the spirit
of renunciation an even temper is but a vain hope.
PEACEFULNESS (Quietude --- Shanti) --- If a seeker is
capable of living, conscious of Truth harming none,
keeping an even temper, in a spirit of renunciation, inspite
of all disturbing environments and happenings around,
then he is the one who shall come to experience peace and
quietude in himself. Even in the midst of a stormy life and
outrageous circumstances, such an individual can
successfully keep his inward balance and intellectual
poise.
ABSENCE OF CROOKEDNESS (Unmalicious tongue ---
Apaishunam) --- The ugliness or beauty of the tongue is
ordered by the personality behind it. A shattered entity
will seek self-gratification in malicious scandal-
1110
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mongering, and the soft, fleshy tongue can often become
more devastating than the most destructive missile. A
seeker who is trying to reach a fuller and more exhaustive
self-expression should develop such an inward harmony
that his speech should echo the fragrance of his soul. A
speech with softness of tone, clarity of expression, honesty
of conviction, power of bringing a clear picture in the
listener's mind with no veiled meaning, overflowing with
sincerity, devotion and love, becomes the very quality of
the autobiography of the speaker's personality. To
develop, therefore, a habit of such speech would be
unconsciously training many aspects in ourselves which
are all necessary for the perfect disciplining of the inner
equipments.
COMPASSION (TENDERNESS) TOWARDS BEINGS ---
In the society in general, it is not reasonable for a seeker to
expect that all will keep up to the ideal that he himself
entertains. There will be imperfections around. But to
recognise, in and through those imperfections, the Infinite
beauty of life expressed, is the secret of enduring
tenderness in all Saints and Sages. Love alone can discover
an infinite amount of tenderness in us. Unless we train
ourselves to see the beauty of life pulsating through even
wretched hearts and ugly characters, we will fail to bring
forth tenderness to sweeten life within and without.
NON-CONVETOUSNESS (Aloluptvam) --- In the
subjective life, to live "without covetousness" means
controlling our sense-organs from extreme indulgence in
1111
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sense-enjoyments. An average man has an endless thirst
and an insatiable
hunger for sense indulgence. To remain in self-control
without endless sense-hunger is meant by the term non-
covetousness.
GENTLENESS AND MODESTY --- These are not so much
the particular disciplines of the individual, as the resultant
beauty and harmony which an individual brings forth as
the fragrance of his culture, in his contacts with the world
outside. These two qualities are best seen in one who has
established himself in all the above-mentioned noble
qualities. The conduct of such a disciplined man will be
both gentle and modest.
ABSENCE OF FICKLE-NESS --- NOT UNNECESSARILY
MOVING THE LIMBS (Achaapalam) --- Restlessness of
mind and unsteadiness of character are reflected in the
physical movement of a person. The body shadows the
condition of the mind. A constant restlessness, a sudden
outburst of activity, an immodest shaking of the body and
voluptuous tossings of the limbs are all noticed only in
individuals who have not yet cultivated a steady character
and a purposeful personality. These can be seen in a child
and there they are even considered as enhancing its
beauty. But as an individual grows, the beauty in him is
his mastery over himself as declared by his movements.
1112
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Shankara explains this as "NOT TO SPEAK OR MOVE
HANDS AND LEGS IN VAIN." This is an extension of the
meaning of this term, and implies the promptitude and
economy of all physical energy in any efficient activity.
Unnecessarily exhausting the muscles with indecisive
movements and thoughtless exertions are signs of
weakness in the personality. Such individuals are
extremely imaginative and miserably weak in their
intellectual calibre and emotional vitality. To avoid such
movements, therefore, is to cure many simple weaknesses
at the various facets of any given personality.
MOREOVER, CONTINUING THE LIST OF DIVINE
QUALITIES:
3. Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred,
absence of pride --- these belong to the one born for the Divine
Estate, O Bharata.
VIGOUR --- BRILLIANT GLOW (Tejas) --- This is not a
mere physical glow of complexion produced by good food
and ample rest. Nor is it just an exterior beauty arising out
of careful tending of the physical structure and planned
nourishing of the pads of flesh around the sage. The glow
of spirituality is not literally a painted halo around him,
glimmering as a ring-of-fire. The brilliance of his intellect,
the twinkling joy in his eyes, the thrilling fragrance of
peace around, the serene poise in his activities, the
dalliance of his love for all, the light of joy that ever shines
1113
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
forth from the innermost depths of his being --- these
constitute their resistible attraction of the personality of
the sage, who, with abundant energy, serves all and
discovers for himself a fulfilment in that service.
FORGIVENESS --- PATIENCE (Kshamaa) --- The context in
which the word is used here should increase the depth of
its meaning. It is not merely "a capacity to patiently live
through some minor physical or mental inconvenience,
when insulted or injured by others." It is a subtle boldness
that is shown by a man in facing the world around with
an unruffled serenity even in the face of the most
powerful opposition and provoking situations.
FORTITUDE (Dhriti) --- When an individual daringly
meets life he cannot expect, all the time, happy situations,
favourable circumstances and a conducive arrangement of
chances in his field of activity. Ordinarily, a weak man
suddenly feels dejected and is tempted to leave his field of
work when it is only half done. Many lose their chances of
achieving the Highest, and desert the field of action,
almost at the moment when, perhaps, victory is round the
corner! In order to stick to his guns, man needs a secret
energy to nurture and nourish his exhausted and fatigued
morale, and this sacred energy welling up in his well-
integrated personality is 'FORTITUDE.' Strength of faith,
conviction in the goal, consistency of purpose, vivid
perception of the ideal and a bold spirit of sacrifice
cultivated diligently --- all these form the source from
1114
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which fortitude trickles down to remove exhaustion,
fatigue, despair and so on.
PURITY (Shoucham) --- The word indicates not only the
inner purity --- purity of thoughts and motives --- but it
also suggests, the purity of environments, cleanliness of
habit and personal belongings. As a result of an over-
emphasis on subjective purity, today, we find in our
society, an utter neglect of external purity. Clean clothes
and civic-habits have both become rare in our society.
Even the devotee-class is unmindful about these, although
our religion emphasises that purity and cleanliness are
unavoidable disciplines for a seeker.
ABSENCE-OF-HATRED (Adroha) --- Harmlessness
(Ahimsa) was a virtue explained in the previous stanza.
Here the same virtue is repeated not only for the purpose
of emphasis but also to indicate a slightly different shade
of meaning. The term here should mean more than
"ABSENCE OF HATRED." Just as an individual will never
have, even in his dream, any idea of injuring himself, a
true seeker, in his recognition of the Oneness in all living
creatures, must come to feel that to injure anyone is to
injure himself.
ABSENCE OF OVER-PRIDE (Na-ati-maanitaa) --- To leave
off one's exaggerated notions of self-honour is,
immediately to relieve oneself from thousands of
avoidable excitements and responsibilities. Life is as light
as a feather to one who has renounced his over-
1115
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
exaggerated pride while to a Coriolanus, life becomes a
heavy cross, to be carried painfully, as it mercilessly cuts
through the living flesh on his shoulders.
The twenty-six qualities described above give us a
complete picture of the nature of a man of 'Divine Estate.'
These qualities are enumerated to serve as a guide to all
those who thirst to become "perfect." To the extent we are
able to reorganise our way-of-life and change our vision of
the world around us on the above lines, to that extent we
shall economise our energies, that are often wasted in idle
pursuits. To respect and live these twenty-six values of life
completely, is to assure ourselves of a right way-of-living.
HERE FOLLOWS A DESCRIPTION OF THE DEMONIAC
(ASURIC) NATURE:
4. Hypocrisy, arrogance and self-conceit, anger, and also
harshness and ignorance, belong to one who is born, O Partha,
for a demoniac-Estate.
The dark features of the ugly personalities in the world
were never before so strikingly brought within the
embrace of a simple stanza. All the Satanic forces that can
ever come to express in the bosom of man have been
brought together under some all-comprehensive 'types' of
devilish-ness, as indicated here. To know them would be a
sufficient warning of what we must avoid and what all
traits, in us, we must carefully weed out from our mental
1116
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
composition, so that the greater energy that is available to
a well-developed man, may, without any obstruction,
flow out of our bosom.
HYPOCRISY (Ostentation --- Dambha) --- 'Pretending to be
righteous but living unrighteous ways of life' is the
meaning that Shankara gives to this term. Hypocrisy is,
certainly, one of the cheapest poses assumed by the
vicious. To them, all their superficial glow of goodness
and purity, of religiosity and sincerity are but attractive
hoods to cover their deadly motives and ugly intentions.
ARROGANCE (Darpa) --- Endless pride of learning, or of
wealth, or of social status, or of family connections, gives
to an individual a kind of insufferable uppishness, and he
looks at the world and the happenings around him
through this misinterpreting and self-deluding medium
and lives in a world of imagined self-importance resulting
in an arrogance that drives away all inward peace. Such
an individual gets exiled from the love of the community
around. An arrogant man is a lonely creature in the world
and his only companions are his own imagined self-
importance and dreams of his glories which none but he
can see. And naturally he becomes highly self-conceited
(Abhimanah).
ANGER (Krodha) --- When such a self-conceited, arrogant,
hypocrite looks at the world around him and finds that
the world's estimate of him is totally different from his
own estimate of himself, he revolts within and hence his
1117
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
wrath (Krodha) at everything around him. And once such
an individual gets worked up with anger, in his speech
and action, there must necessarily be a disconcerting
insolence (Parushya).
Such arrogance, self-conceit, wrath and insolence --- arise
from his own self-delusions (ajnanam). He knows not
himself, that he is ignorant of the scheme of the world
around him, and consequently, he is blind to the right
relationship that he should maintain with the world
around him. In short, he is extremely ego-centric and he
expects the world to be what he wants it to be, and, in his
delusion, he supplies a mad blue-print prescribing how
the world of healthy beings is to behave and act in his
field of actions. This ignorance of oneself and one's
relationship with the things and beings around is the
secret cause that generally forces one to revolt against the
environments and act quixotically.
Such people are termed here by Krishna as the
'Diabolically Fallen,' the Asuric. Such a spectacular
contrast provides by the picture of the Asuric, as given
here, gloriously brings out the earlier picture of the
'Divinely Good' --- the Daivic, in relief.
THE EFFECTS OF THE TWO NATURES --- THE
DIVINELY GOOD AND THE DIABOLICALLY FALLEN -
-- ARE SPOKEN OF AS FOLLOWS:
1118
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
5. The divine nature is deemed for liberation, the demoniacal for
bondage; grieve not, O Pandava, you are born with divine
qualities.
On hearing such an exhaustive enumeration of the
qualities in the good and the bad hearts, it will be natural
for every sincere student of the Geeta to feel a despair not
knowing whether he himself belongs to the latter or the
former category. Generally, one would find it easier to
consider oneself bad rather than feel the confidence that
one belongs to the good. Arjuna must have felt the same
despair and, perhaps, reading this in his face, Krishna
consoled him: "GRIEVE NOT, O PANDAVA! YOU ARE
BORN OF THE DIVINE ESTATE." That a seeker has the
necessary interest and perseverance to read the Geeta up
to this chapter, itself shows that he belongs to the
'DIVINELY-GOOD' category!
Both the ethical beauties and the non-ethical ugliness are
painted here not for the purpose of sending the good to an
eternal heaven and of damning the vicious to a perpetual
hell! Here, the theme is taken up on a more scientific basis.
Ethical virtues are the intelligent ways of reviving man's
exhausted energies and fatigued spirit to live. By living
these healthy values of a righteous life, the individual
unshackles his psychological personality from its self-
made entanglements: "THE DIVINE ESTATE LEADS TO
RELEASE." As a contrast to this, the negative tendencies
cultivated by the 'Diabolically Fallen' are self-made
shackles that chain a man to a realm of confusions and
1119
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sorrows, forbidding him to grow into the ampler fields of
his own inner possibility: "THE DEVILISH TO
BONDAGE."
GRIEVE NOT (Maa shuchah) --- To become sentimental
and desperate or to exhaust oneself in self-pity, or self-
condemnation, is a psychological malady, and one
suffering from it can never discover in oneself, the
energising cheer, the sustaining confidence, and the
steady will that are required for an intelligent self-
diagnosis and an effective self-cure. To a seeker, living the
ethical values is, in itself, a kind of treatment to cure him
of some of his personality-diseases. To the Hindus, a
sinner is not a dangerous mental leper, or a failure of the
Omnipotent Lord. To a Vedantin, Satan is not a perpetual
challenge to God.
The good, contaminated by weakness and 'ignorance,' is
the evil. And the evil, when cured of 'ignorance,' itself
becomes the good. A looking glass covered with dust,
cannot reflect light, and mirror properly the objects in
front of it. This is not because the glass has lost its capacity
to reflect, but because its effectiveness has got veiled at
present by the accumulated dust, which is essentially
something other than the glass. To wipe it clean is to bring
forth from it more clarity and light for the reflection. A
'Diabolically Fallen' one has also the same Infinite Light of
Pure Wisdom --- but alas, extremely dimmed by false
values and wrong concepts in his bosom.
1120
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
TAKING UP THE 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN,' KRISHNA
SCIENTIFICALLY ANALYSES THEIR MENTAL
CONTENTS, AND THEY ARE SEPARATELY OBSERVED
AND STUDIED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
6. There are two types of beings, in this world, the 'divine' and
the 'demoniacal; ' the divine have been described at length; hear
from Me, O Partha, of the demoniacal.
According to Krishna the entire creation falls under two
categories: the 'Divinely Good' (Daivic) and the
'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuric). But in fact, there is yet
another group, the 'Incorrigibly Indifferent' (Rakshasic)
about whom the Lord is serenely silent. This silence
regarding them is perhaps more eloquent than all his
eloquence regarding the other two groups! Religions and
the techniques of self-development are addressed only to
the former two groups and not to the Rakshasic type of
men. They have not yet sufficiently grown in their
evolution; they are still in the hands of the moulding
Nature and they have yet to be properly baked in the
furnace-of-life and its scorching experiences. As they grow
up sufficiently, they come under the category of the
"Diabolically Fallen," and religion can come forward to lift
them to the status of the "Divinely Good." From then
onwards it can show them the way to experience and
realise the Absolute Goodness which is the Eternal
Reality.
1121
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
If all about the Asura type was given in a broad sketch
earlier, (XVI-4) the details are being filled in elaborately in
the following stanzas.
In almost all religious text-books of the world, the positive
qualities of goodness and righteousness are glorified. But
they rarely paint, exhaustively, the negative tendencies in
a devilish personality. Some critics of Hinduism are
jubilant in discovering this tendency in our scriptural texts
as a great weakness in our prophets and seers. This
criticism against Hinduism was levelled mainly by the
critics of the nineteenth century. They are very silent
nowadays because of the results of the twentieth century
psychological researches and the success of some of the
psychiatric methods. To become poignantly aware of the
negative tendencies in one's own personality-structure,
and to become consciously disgusted with those vulgar
urges, are the ways of easily eradicating such wrong
tendencies from one's inner nature. Be aware of a
weakness; it readily disappears from our character --- says
the modern psychiatrist.
The bad is not merely an opposite of the good. It can never
be that the good has certain urges and the bad has another
type of urges. Human urges are always typical, and both
the good and the bad are expressions of man's heart. Bad
is only "GOOD MISCONSTRUED." Therefore, in the
enumeration of the qualities of the bad, we do not have to
meet with a sapless list of the opposites of the previous
enumeration which pointed the good. As we discover the
1122
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
contents of the bad mind, we shall discover that they are
all the very same as those of the good, but mis-applied
under a wrong enthusiasm created as a result of some
false evaluations. Virtue, poisoned with ignorance is evil;
evil, treated and cured of its poison, when it regains its
health, becomes virtue.
THUS THE VERY FIRST STANZA WHICH PAINTS THE
ASURIC TYPE OPENS, AS IT WERE, WITH AN
APOLOGY FOR THE 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN,'
ALONG WITH A POWERFUL SUGGESTION ELICITING
OUR MOST TENDER KINDNESS TOWARDS THEM:
7. The demoniac know not what to do and what to refrain from;
neither purity, nor right conduct, nor truth is found in them.
WHAT TO DO AND WHAT TO REFRAIN FROM --- The
men of Asuric nature know not either 'action' or 'inaction.'
Here 'action' means any intelligent piece of work
undertaken and pursued with a right motive so as to gain
for ourselves a better inner satisfaction.
Religious acts, selfless work and dedicated service are all
examples of right actions whereby the individual gains
not only immediate profits, but also the ultimate inner
heightening of culture; for he will then be working
without losing sight of his Higher Goal. 'Inaction' here
means forbidding ourselves from striving in the right
channels, and that can bring about only restlessness for
1123
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ourselves and for others. The list enumerating the
negative tendencies of the 'fallen' starts with the idea of
'ignorance.' This is very significant. If any one commits a
crime in 'ignorance,' though justice may not accept it as an
excuse, the heart of the society will readily discover a
tender forgiveness for the erring soul.
NEITHER PURITY NOR RIGHT CONDUCT NOR
TRUTH IS FOUND IN THEM --- Outer cleanliness is, to a
large measure, a reflection of the inner condition. A
disciplined man with education and culture alone can, in
fact, maintain a systematic order and cleanliness around
him.
One who is incapable of deciding the actions to be
pursued as well as those to be avoided by him, has no
harmony within; and therefore, there is no inner purity, or
outer cleanliness (shaucha), for such an individual. If the
mind is indisciplined there cannot be a decent, and well-
regulated life, since outward behaviour (Achara) is nothing
but an expression of the mind. Therefore, Krishna
indicates that in them good conduct is conspicuous by its
absence.
He who is confused about 'action' and 'inaction,' who has
no purity, or external cleanliness, and who fails in good
conduct, cannot maintain TRUTHFULNESS in his words.
All through, if you read these terms very carefully in the
spirit in which the Divine Charioteer has given them out
you will find in them a divine tenderness for such
1124
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'Diabolically Fallen' folks. There is no revengefulness for
the sinner anywhere, even hinted at, in the entire length of
the Geeta. It is a logical conclusion that such a man must
necessarily be untruthful in words, not because he is
deliberately pursuing dishonesty, but because by
temperament he is incapacitated to be honest.
MOREOVER:
8. They say, "the universe is without truth, without (moral)
basis, without a God; not brought about by any regular causal
sequence, with lust for its cause; what else? "
In the description of the 'Diabolically Fallen,' we recognise
the picture of an utterly sceptical materialist who looks at
life from his own limited intellectual standpoint, and who,
naturally, fails to recognise any final purpose or
permanent substratum for this seemingly confusing array
of illogical happenings. Such materialists, however, have
stalwart intellects and are capable of original and
independent thinking, but they have to be a wee bit
trained, to see something beyond what their general
observation and analysis can discover for them. The
materialist view-point of life and the world are explained
in the stanza.
WITHOUT TRUTH (Asatyam) --- Even when they are very
scientific in their observation and analysis, the materialists
fail to recognise the Truth that upholds the Universe. They
1125
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
recognise change, and the constant change itself is
accepted by them as the world, without having for it any
steady and changeless substratum. At the same time,
scientists admit that change is a relative phenomenon and
without a changeless, constant foundation, change cannot
take place and give us the impression of continuity.
Without a screen, steady and motionless, a running film
cannot be projected; without a constant bed, the waters of
the rivers cannot flow continuously. The everchanging
universe cannot give us a constant APPEARANCE
without its having a steady and changeless 'foundation.'
This eternal and unchanging Reality behind the ever-
changing Universe is called the Truth. According to the
materialist, "the Universe is without Truth (Asatyam)."
WITHOUT A LORD: (An-Ishwaram) --- There is no
substratum; at least, is there a commanding intelligence
that orders, regulates, and generally guides the
happenings in the world? According to the materialist
there is no such Director of Events, no Architect of
Happenings. There is no Creator, no Sustainer.
NOT BROUGHT ABOUT IN REGULAR SEQUENCE ---
The entire universe of beings and things is formed only as
a result of mutual combinations of the great elements and
the sole ruling factor that determines Creation is "chance";
and the only deciding urge, propelled by which beings are
born, is nothing but 'lust.' Even modern psychologists
insist that the sex urge alone is the mother urge because of
1126
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which everything is happening, every achievement is
gained and every profit is made everywhere in life.
AFTER DESCRIBING THUS, THE POINT OF VIEW OF
THE PURE MATERIALIST, KRISHNA SYMPATHISES
WITH THE LOT OF SUCH MEN AND TRACES THEIR
INSTINCTIVE DEEDS:
9. Holding this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and
fierce deeds, come forth as the enemies of the world, for its
destruction.
HOLDING THIS VIEW --- Holding the view, as described
in the previous stanza, that the world has no substratum,
that there is no controlling power, and that the world
continues to exist and procreate by itself, if a society were
to live, giving full vent to animal nature, it will only
achieve restless-ness and strife, disaster and destruction
for itself.
RUINED SOULS --- A balanced personality can only be
for the individual who has, to begin with, a clear
conception and a correct judgement of himself. Whenever
an individual forgets himself, he acts in a manner
unbecoming to the dignity of his birth, education, culture
and social status, like a mad man or a drunken fool. When
a materialist thus works in ignorance of his own divine
status, he, naturally, behaves as though he is an animal ---
insulting the divine status of his own evolution.
1127
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF SMALL INTELLECT (Alpa-Buddhayah) --- Once an
individual refuses to recognise the "Divine Presence of
Truth," embracing and underlying life, he will function in
life as a self-centred, selfish entity, endlessly striving to
eke out his own personal satisfaction from the material
world. Seeking complete fulfilment in the gratification of
his sensual urges, he strives hard but discovers only a
carping disappointment, a burning hunger and a sense of
defeat in life. Krishna, in his infinite kindness,
sympathises with such men and calls them "MEN OF
SMALL INTELLECT."
FIERCE DEEDS --- "If a materialist does not want to
believe in the Eternal Reality, and if others must believe in
some Permanent Truth, why not allow equal freedom to
both --- the believers and non-believers?" This is a natural
question that will arise in any man, if he be truly
democratic and tolerant in his point-of-view. Anticipating
such a doubt in a sincere student, Krishna says, in the
second line of the stanza, that when an individual loses
his faith in the Higher Reality, he becomes licentious at all
levels of his expression. Prompted by his selfish urges to
seek and discover his fulfilment in life, he would, perhaps,
ultimately bring about irremediable disasters to his era.
Historically, the world to-day is going through the same
predicament as declared and anticipated in the Geeta!!
Materialists, who do not recognise the Truth, seeking Its
expression through life's happenings, will unconsciously
1128
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
bring about such a discordant note of disharmony in the
community that it will plunge the world into a bloody
mire of disastrous wars.
THE VIEW-POINT OF THE LIFE OF A MATERIALIST
AND HIS MOTIVES IN HIS EVERY-DAY LIFE, ARE
BEAUTIFULLY DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZAS:
10. Filled with insatiable desires, full of hypocrisy, pride and
arrogance, holding evil ideas through delusion, they work with
impure resolves.
The gruesome ugliness of the inner nature of a pure
materialist, as he struts about in the fields of his
achievements, cannot be better expressed than what Vyasa
has accomplished in this stanza. For a more vivid and
thorough depiction of the mental contents of the
'Diabolically Fallen,' for a clearer description of the quality
and texture of his activities in society, one has to go
ransacking the entire existing literature of all the
languages in the world, only to fail to find a parallel to
this pregnant verse.
FILLED WITH INSATIABLE DESIRES --- Activities are
not at all possible unless they are instigated by desires.
Where desires have ended, the expression of dynamic life
in achievements is impossible. And yet, to remain as
1129
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
victims of desires, is to be some horrid machines of
activity, vomiting out into the world our inner poison of
ego and ego-centric passions. To sustain life only for the
satisfaction of desires is unintelligent; for they have a
knack of multiplying themselves as we go on satisfying
them one after another. They are 'hard to appease.' Filled
with insatiable desires, when a man uses his intelligence,
abilities and knowledge, he naturally brings about an
endless stream of disturbances in and around him.
FULL OF HYPOCRISY, PRIDE (CONCEIT) AND
ARROGANCE --- Desire is but an expression of the ego
when the seeker seeks a permanent satisfaction and
infinite fulfilment through sense enjoyments. When he is
thus deluded in the misconception of his ego-vanity,
negative tendencies such as hypocrisy, pride (conceit), and
arrogance will naturally rise up, and smothered by them,
he ceaselessly strives to satisfy the unending demands of
his own unbridled desires.
VICTIMS OF DELUSION --- Desire cannot come to the all-
fulfilled. Desire can come only to him who fails to feel his
own Infinitude and expresses himself as a limited ego
(Jiva). Forgetting his own divine nature, in his
identification with the unreal things and values of life, he
develops in himself a hunger to enjoy peace and
happiness. Naturally, numerous desires arise in him and
seeking fulfilment of all such desires, he indulges in sense-
gratification.
1130
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THEY WORK WITH IMPURE RESOLVE --- The mental
biography of the 'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuras) is complete
in its sequence when the stanza says that the ego,
desperately struggling to gain inner peace, must
necessarily forsake all consideration for others, ignore all
noble values-of-life, and enter into the fields of activity,
shamelessly intolerant, inconsiderate and even brutal.
Drunk with passions, opiated with his own desires, he
works in the world as a maniac, hurling blood and acid,
death and disaster all around him in the community!
The picture, viewed microcosmically, shows a materialist,
building his life upon the restless waves of his desire-
tossed mind. The same world-painting, when looked at
macrocosmically, portrays vividly the ugliness of
materialistic communities and nations. Life's beauty
depends upon the beauty of the philosophy upon which it
is built. If the foundations are false, the edifice, however
strongly built, will prove to be no better than a card-castle.
The economic break-up, social evils, political upheavals,
and general restlessness that are found all over the world
are all thoroughly discussed in this stanza, if we know
how to read them all into it.
It is also interesting to note how Krishna, while explaining
the 'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuras), without directly saying
so, is painting the picture of a materialist, who by nature,
is an atheist in thought and a tireless hunter of pleasure in
action. In this age of materialism, don' t we prove
ourselves faithful to the type just now discussed!
1131
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PAINTING THE CONCEPT OF LIFE IN A CONFIRMED
MATERIALIST, KRISHNA CONTINUES:
11. Giving themselves over to immeasurable cares ending only
with death, regarding gratification of lust as their highest aim,
and feeling sure that, that is all (that matters) .
ENDLESS CARES --- Wedded to anxiety and care, such
desperate men drag their life of futile endeavours along
the corridors of sobs and sorrows to the silent court-yard
of death. In an ordinary life, cares besiege the citadel of
peace and joy, especially when hosts of powerful desires
conquer the individual. The struggles-in-acquiring (Yoga)
and anxieties-in-preserving (Kshema) the acquired objects-
of-desires are the contents of all cares of life. To waste an
entire life-time in such anxieties, and in the end to realise
how miserably one had failed is indeed a tragedy.
SATISFACTION OF LUST AS THE HIGHEST (Kama-
upabhoga-parama) --- Consistent effort either in the field of
the good, or in the field of the vicious, put forth without a
philosophy of life that sustains the continuity of an
individual's activities, is a haphazard endeavour, ignoble
and futile.
The philosophy of life that is accepted by the 'Diabolically
Fallen' is invariably the same wherever they be. The
philosophy of the (Charvakas) atheists has been hinted at
1132
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
herein. To them, satisfaction of their lusty nature is the
goal of life and there is nothing beyond it.
ASSURED THAT IS ALL --- Generally, such materialists
are no fools; they have an ample share of a rough and
ready intellect. They do realise that a life dedicated to an
endless hunt after sense-gratifications is a tragic way of
living, and that is such a scheme of existence the
individual is called upon to pay an exorbitant price for
relatively insignificant gains. And yet, they continue,
seeking satisfaction of their uncontrolled lust. If you
question them, their answer is that life is nothing but a
series of such strifes. They know not of any life, the
contents of which are peace and joy. They are generally
pessimistic, and since they scrupulously avoid seriously
thinking about life, they invariably come to express
suicidal tendencies and homicidal temperaments.
According to them, sorrows and care alone constitute the
fabric of life. They fail to discover any harmony or rhythm
underlying the superficial disturbances in life.
Entertaining no hope, either for themselves or for the
world, they live with embittered hearts, revengefully
meeting the happenings around them in the world. In
unproductive exertions, they waste their powers only to
die a miserable death; exhausted, wearied, disappointed.
THE EXPRESSION OF THE ABOVE PHILOSOPHY IN
THE LIFE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IS DESCRIBED IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZA:
1133
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
12. Bound by a hundred ties of hope, given to lust and anger,
they do strive to obtain, by unlawful means, hoards of wealth for
sensual enjoyments.
BOUND BY A HUNDRED TIES OF HOPE, LUST AND
ANGER --- Bringing vividly to the mind of the student,
the picture of such a materialist, Krishna records in this
stanza, the activities of such an individual. Entangled by
hundreds of desires, his mental and intellectual energies
get dissipated. Such an individual becomes restless and
impatient with things that happen around him, and soon
loses his balance of mind --- his sense of judgement.
Irritated and constantly unhappy with himself and his
environments, such a man is seen in life 'GIVEN TO
YEARNINGS AND ANGER.' Wherever desire is throttled,
anger is natural. Since he is devoted to desires he pursues
sense-fulfilments, and since in the world of competition,
desire-fulfilments, often get throttled, his lusty urges get
transformed into wild and passionate anger.
THEY DO STRIVE, no doubt --- They do tirelessly and
diligently strive to satisfy their ever-increasing urges. To
secure their quota of sensual enjoyments, they must
necessarily acquire and procure objects of sense-
satisfaction from the world without. They are not seeking
happiness as such or peace as such; theirs is the anxiety to
quench a nameless thirst which they are constantly feeling
--- a strange hunger they are chronically suffering from.
They have not the mental equipoise to investigate into
1134
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
their urges, and analyse and judge them properly. Madly
they strive on to acquire and possess, and in their
desperate anxiety to indulge and to enjoy, they lose sight
of the divine principles of existence and the noble dictates
of their conscience. THEY DO STRIVE, day and night, to
satisfy their inexhaustible passion, with wealth acquired
and hoarded by all known unjust means.
Though written some five thousand years ago, strangely
enough, this portion of the description of the 'Diabolically
Fallen' reads as though it were a bitter, but honest,
criticism of our own age!! Thus, if students of the Geeta
were to judge our era of brilliant scientific knowledge,
material prosperity, secular achievements and political
freedom, they will have to classify our era as of this
'Diabolically Fallen' type. Amidst the bleating sirens of our
booming industries, the horrid thuds of our modern
missiles, the devastating powers of nature that we have
discovered and released for our own destruction, we may
not give our ears to the thundering truth declared by the
'wise' men of such a distant past; but sincere students of
the Geeta cannot but perceive the unquestionable veracity
in them, and must come to feel sad for the world and age.
CONTINUING, THE LORD PAINTS THE ATTITUDE OF
SUCH PEOPLE TO LIFE:
1135
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
13. "This has to-day been gained by me" --- "this desire I shall
obtain" --- "this is mine" --- and "this wealth shall also be mine
in future. "
There is not much in this stanza that calls for explanation,
for the average man of the world to-day lives, exactly the
life suggested here. The most successful man in a
competitive world is the one who lives in constant
consciousness of what he has already acquired, and
remembers and sweats for his day-to-day ambitions, to
acquire and possess, more and more of the wealth of the
world. And the laughable paradox in the philosophy of
possession is that the more one has, the more one craves
for. No material-wealth hunter has ever declared, "I have
this much now, that will do." On the other hand, when
one gets drunk with the vanity of possession, one's
shameless cry is only: "I HAVE THIS MUCH, AND THIS
WEALTH SHALL ALSO BE MINE."
The game of desires is an endless gamble. The more one
possesses the more one is tempted to strive to possess
more. Each time a man strives to acquire something, his
desire is to feel his full share of satisfaction. But,
invariably, his experience is that he is not fully satisfied,
and in his disappointment, he thirsts for more and more
possessions. Earlier in the Geeta, it is said that "he who
has disciplined and controlled himself to such an extent
that the world of stimuli cannot create in him even a
ripple of reaction, alone knows what peace is and not the
desirer of desires."
1136
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THIS STANZA POINTED OUT THE MATERIALIST'S
ATTITUDE TO THE PHYSICAL THINGS AROUND
HIM; THE FOLLOWING STANZA GIVES US HIS
ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD OF BEINGS:
14. "That enemy has been slain by me" --- "and others also shall
I destroy" --- "I am the Lord" --- "I am the enjoyer" --- "I am
perfect, powerful and happy. "
The translation of this stanza is itself its commentary. And
it is a commentary on the lives of us too! All businessmen
in the world, unknown to themselves, constantly chant
this stanza in their heart-of-hearts. "I destroyed one
competitor in the market, and now I must destroy the
remaining competitors also."... "In fact, what can those
poor men do to stop me from doing what I want?"...
"Because there is none equal to me in any respect... I am
the Lord. I enjoy, I am the most successful man. I am
strong in influence, among political leaders, in my
business connections, and in my bank balance. I am strong
and healthy...." This, in short, is the ego's SONG OF
SUCCESS that is ever hummed in the heart of a true
materialist. Under the spell of this Satanic lullaby, the
higher instincts and the diviner urges in man go into a
sleep of intoxication.
WHAT IS THE INTELLECTUAL ESTIMATE OF A
MATERIALIST ABOUT HIMSELF? LISTEN:
1137
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
15. "I am rich and well-born --- Who else is equal to me? --- I
will give (alms, money) --- I will rejoice. " Thus are they,
deluded by 'ignorance. '
Deluded by misconceptions of himself, such a man of
sickly, bloated conceit looks at the world through a mind
distorted by vanity, and wrongly judges the world and his
own relationship with it. He feels happy and
congratulates himself on his high birth and breed, on his
belongings and wealth, and fails to find anyone equal to
him. Self-exiled from society, he lives in a false castle of
vanity, suffering innumerable psychological privations.
He gloats that he will, by his ritualism, even order the
gods to serve him --- that he shall, with his gifts, purchase
the whole world. And thus glorified by the world, served
by the gods, "I shall rejoice in the world..." Such are some
of the maddest ravings of his restless heart, in the dark
depths of his utter 'ignorance.'
SUMMARISING THE THREE PREVIOUS STANZAS, IT
IS SAID:
16. Bewildered by many a fancy, entangled in the snare of
delusion, addicted to the gratification of lust, they fall into a foul
hell.
BEWILDERED BY MANY A FANCY --- When an ego-
centric individual, who has thus sold himself to sense-
1138
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
indulgence, spends his time seeking gratification from the
world-of-objects, his mind becomes ever unsteady. The
mind of an indulgent sensualist soon learns to empty its
powers of concentration and exhausts itself in its own
hallucinations, fancies and imaginations.
ENTANGLED IN THE SNARE OF DELUSION --- If the
individual's mind, as a result of its false philosophy, gets
dissipated in sapless dreams, his intellect also is in a sad
condition. His power of judgement and discrimination is
caught up in a web of delusions and false values. His
intellect, cut off from its permanent moorings, has
thereafter no platform of its own to spring from and come
to a correct judgement and evaluation of life. It fails to
recognise the permanent harmony of life, but recognises
only its own ego-centric vanities. Life looked at through
such a disturbing equipment naturally gives a distorted
view.
ADDICTED TO GRATIFICATION OF LUST --- When an
individual's intellect is clouded, his mind gets agitated,
and his sense-organs, which are the vehicles through
which the mind-intellect has to express itself, certainly
behave erratically. When a driver is drunk, the car cannot
move properly. Naturally, therefore, such an individual
becomes a victim of lust and sense-gratifications.
THEY FALL INTO A FOUL HELL --- We need not be
great philosophers to understand that such an individual,
tired physically, confused mentally, and upset
1139
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellectually, will live here in a self-created hell,
distributing his own personality-contents of woes to
others around him. A man can make a heaven of hell, and
a hell of heaven, by the harmony or discord in himself. A
subjectively shattered personality cannot find peace or
fulfilment in any situation. Even if the environments are
conducive, he discovers, in himself, methods of unsettling
them by his own inner sufferings.
If a single individual who has these false values, discovers
for himself but a sad world of sorrow even in the midst of
happy surroundings, we can very well understand what
would be the condition of the world when a good majority
of us are having, in varying degrees, the above qualities.
Hell and heaven are determined by the amount of discord
or harmony that we successfully bring about in our inner
makeup.
WHAT THEN ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCH
PEOPLE, AND HOW DO THEY PERFORM THEIR
YAJNAS?
17. Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with pride and drunk with
wealth, they perform sacrifices in name (only) out of ostentation,
contrary to scriptural ordinance.
Yajna need not necessarily be considered as the elaborate
ritualism described in the Vedas. But it can be interpreted,
in the Geeta style (III) as "A CO-OPERATIVE
1140
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ENDEAVOUR IN WHICH EACH INDIVIDUAL POURS
HIS BEST INTO THE ACTIVITY OF LIFE, AS AN
OBLATION TO PROPITIATE THE POTENTIAL
GOODNESS IN EXISTENCE, AND WHICH, WHEN
INVOKED, IS TO BE DISTRIBUTED EQUALLY TO ALL."
This spirit of selfless effort in the service of mankind was
described by Krishna as the greatest Yajna; WORK IS
WORKSHIP.
SELF-CONCEITED, STUBBORN, FULL WITH PRIDE
AND DRUNK WITH HIS OWN POSSESSIONS AND
WEALTH --- When an individual enters the fields of social
work or national service, he does not always do so with a
true yajna-spirit only. Inspite of very many of the leaders
and workers striving hard for the upliftment of their
country, we find that the world of our age is falling away
from peace, plenty, and prosperity. When a man of the
'Diabolically Fallen' type reaches any field of activity, in
spite of his vociferous claims of selfless service, he is
incapable of it, because of the very nature of his
personality and character. Such friends of society can
perform a yajna in name only. Unconsciously, their actions
will be poisoned by their vanity, coloured by their
sensuality, distorted by their arrogance, and generally
polluted by their false philosophy. As a result of all their
actions, sorrow alone will be the result.
SUCH LOW MEN CONTINUE FALLING LOWER AND
LOWER EACH DAY:
1141
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
18. Given to egoism, power, haughtiness, lust and anger, these
malicious people hate Me in their own bodies, and in those of
others.
Once egoism takes possession of an individual, he steadily
sinks to the ugliest depths of animalism. Drunk with
passions, he abdicates from all the dignity of a cultured
man and behaves as an ineffectual beast, strutting about
precariously on its hind legs! Such a biological freak, who
is physiologically a man but temperamentally an animal,
is the type that is now being discussed as the 'Diabolically
Fallen' (Asura).
Enumerating the inner contents of such an individual,
Lord Krishna says that he is "FULL OF EGOISM, BRUTE
STRENGTH, ARROGANCE, PASSION AND ANGER."
Any one of these is sufficient to pull one down to the
depths of depravity, but the Lord characterises the Asura -
-- type of man as having all these qualities, all at once. Not
only does he have these qualities --- and who does not
have? --- but, unlike an evolver, the Asuric man comes to
pin his faith on these qualities, and he struggles to
discover his fulfilment only in the expression of these
tendencies.
What is the harm if an individual lives these values? This
is a question that is often asked by an indulgent youth,
when he is advised by his elders not to live yielding
readily to his low urges and ugly temptations. The
1142
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Geetacharya here explains that the consequence of
disrespecting all cultural values, and living an uncultured
ego-centric existence of passions and desires would be
nothing short of total destruction of life.
Persons who are entertaining the above-mentioned
attitudes, would ignore the sanctity of life, and without
any compunction whatsoever, desecrate it. They will grow
malignant, and in order to satisfy the low urges of egoism,
would come to "HATE ME IN THEIR OWN BODIES
AND IN THOSE OF OTHERS." The Sacred Life, the
Paramatman, does not come out to express Its full play
when blanketed by the low sensuous urges. Ethical values
are disciplines of the thought-life, whereby a mind so
tuned up becomes the right instrument to serve faithfully
the seeker of the Self. Unethical values and immoral
intentions choke the great Melody of Life and reduce it to
a discordant, purposeless noise, shattering peace and
contentment within one's own and in another's bosom.
THE FALL IN EVOLUTION SUFFERED BY SUCH
THOUGHTLESS MATERIALISTS AS A RESULT OF
THEIR OWN FALSE VALUES AND FOUL ACTIONS IS
BEING TRACED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
19. These cruel haters, worst among men in the world, I hurl
these evil-doers for ever into the wombs of the demons only.
1143
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Specimens of the 'Diabolically Fallen' type of men are
characterised here, in a spirit of loving despair by the
Lord, "AS THE MOST DEGRADED OF MEN IN THIS
WORLD. THEY ARE MALICIOUS AND CRUEL" ---
malicious against the dignity of themselves, and cruel to
the living beings around. They are, says the Lord,
"THROWN BY ME PERPETUALLY INTO THE WOMBS
OF DEMONS." Here Krishna is identifying Himself with
the 'Law' of Action and Reaction --- wrong action leaves
wrong tendencies behind, and, propelled by such negative
tendencies, the personality in an individual, after his
death in this physical structure, demands an appropriate
field of existence. An Asuric individual should necessarily
discover his fulfilment only in an Asuric environment.
Therefore the 'Law' of Action and Reaction orders that
such cruel men, again and again, reach similar wombs
until the sheer horror of their experiences brings home to
them a sudden realisation of the follies and futilities in
following such a low tempo of life. The idea of
reincarnation suggested herein has already been
exhaustively discussed earlier in our discourses (VIII-6).
CONTINUING:
20. Entering into demoniacal wombs, and deluded, not attaining
to Me, birth after birth, they thus fall, O Kaunteya, into a
condition still lower than that.
1144
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Tracing the line of fall of an Asura type of man, Krishna
says that an individual having repeatedly reached, as a
result of his previous life, the same Asuric environment,
life after life, fails to realise the Infinite joys of the Self.
They never climb the heights of cultural beauty but slowly
sink lower and lower to reach the bottom grades of beings.
So far we had a vivid review of two types of men: the
'DIVINELY GOOD' and the 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN.'
A majority of us, in varying degrees, belong to the latter
class. As a spiritual seeker is never satisfied merely with
the theoretical explanations and descriptions, Krishna
now advises the entire mankind, through Arjuna, on how
even he who has fallen so hopelessly to the Asura level,
can learn to climb up and steadily progress in his spiritual
evolution. None is eternally condemned, nor does anyone
deserve a perpetual hell --- such a view is illogical,
unphilosophic, and stupid.
DESCRIBING THE TECHNIQUE OF HASTENING
ONE'S EVOLUTION, THE DIVINE CHARIOTEER SAYS:
21. These three are the gates of hell, destructive of the Self ---
lust, anger and greed; therefore, one should abandon these three.
The Lord indicates here that there are three gateways to
reach HELL. Earlier in a stanza, in the very same chapter,
He described that HELL and HEAVEN are conditions
created by the mind only; they are merely subjective
1145
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
experiences in life, and the three false values mentioned
here are the main causes of the former.
DESIRE, ANGER, GREED --- The main theme of the entire
chapter is to call man away from a life of sense-
gratification into the ampler fields of desireless actions
and egoless perfections.
Where there is desire, anger is a natural corollary. The
constant flying of an individual's thoughts towards an
object of gratification is called 'desire,' and when the
steady flow of these thoughts of aggrandisement and
possession are deflected by some obstacle, the refracted
thoughts are called 'anger.' When disappointed in desire-
gratifications, a storm of revolt rises in the mind, as a
consequence of which anger soars up to toss, wreck and
sink the boat of life.
If ANGER is thus the thought-storm arising in our mind at
the disappointment of a desire, GREED is the erosion of
our mental strength and inner peace when desires are
more and more satiated. When a desire gets fulfilled, an
insatiable thirst for more and more joy holds the
individual, and this endless appetite ruins the mental
strength and saps dry the personality-vitality in the
individual. Greed is a sense of dissatisfaction constantly
pursuing and poisoning the sense of satisfaction that we
have already experienced. In an undisciplined man, there
can be no satisfaction at any time; even when his desires
are satisfied he is unhappy, because his appetite for
1146
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
enjoyment is thereby sharpened and he hungers for more;
if the desires are throttled, the disappointment brings into
him anger, and he suffers the consequent wretchedness.
If this logic about the action and interaction between
desire, anger, and greed is accepted, then we are forced to
accept Krishna's conclusion in this stanza: "THEREFORE
ONE SHOULD FORSAKE THESE THREE."
HERE FOLLOWS THE PRAISE OF THE
RENUNCIATION OF EGO, ANGER AND GREED:
22. A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness, O
Kaunteya, practises what is good for him and thus goes to the
Supreme Goal.
Those who are avoiding all the three gateways to hell are
complimented here. It is promised that those who avoid
derailing themselves into any of these dangerous by-paths
of self-exploitation and self-ruination, will steadily
progress on the straight path to their life's goal. To wander
into fields of desire, anger and greed is to dissipate our
energies. Devoid of the divine vitality of a fully grown
and well-balanced human personality, the seeker feels
fatigued and not strong enough to meet the terrible
challenges that arise from within himself. To overcome the
strong temptations of the sense-objects, the mind and
intellect should re-charge the individual's inner abilities
with which the individual can strive hard and effectively
1147
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
achieve self-expansion. He who is avoiding THESE
THREE GATES OF DARKNESS --- which are sure to lead
him into deeper and deeper confusions and despairs and
ultimately take him to the sub-human level of existence ---
will be, it is promised here, practising WHAT IS GOOD
FOR HIM.
The term 'Shreyas' has no equivalent word of the same
import in English. It does not merely mean 'good' but it
has a deeper and wider import in Sanskrit. Shreyas, when
practised, not only brings happiness to the practitioner,
but also contributes much to the well-being of the people
around him.
Progressing thus in the right direction, the individual
"GOES TO THE GOAL SUPREME." Cultural unfoldment
cannot be a miraculous overnight development. The bud
should grow, open and bloom, under the careful
nourishment of steady discipline, vigorous study and
perfect understanding. The unfoldment is more delicate
than that of a flower.
This stanza explains to the seeker what is to be avoided by
him and indicates how he will thereby have a positive
development and inner growth. But it may be asked how
a POSITIVE growth can be effected as a result of a
NEGATIVE act of denial. Avoiding bad food can preserve
health but it cannot give the positive joy of taking a
healthy full dinner. Similarly, avoiding the dissipation of
our energies through desire, anger and greed, would,
1148
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perhaps, end all our agitations caused by these three. But
how can that create any positive development in
ourselves? The Geeta preaches a positive way-of-life; and
the stanza, as it stands, suggests this positive achievement
when it says that such an individual "PRACTISES WHAT
IS GOOD FOR HIM."
WHAT IS THE POSITIVE PRACTICE?
23. He who, having cast aside the ordinance of the scriptures,
acts under the impulse of desire, attains neither perfection, nor
happiness, nor the Supreme Goal.
The Divine Teacher of the Geeta explains that when the
ruinous expenditure of vitality, both psychological and
intellectual, is stopped and energy is conserved, it has to
be applied in the right direction. If again the energy is
misused, the chances are that the seeker would dash
himself down with a mightier bump to the depths of a
miserable life. Ravana and such other mighty Asuras of the
Puranas are typical examples of personalities that
performed fierce tapashcharya (penance), accumulated
inner dynamism, and yet achieved but a thorough self-
destruction! So mighty was their strength that they made
their own generation rock, crumble and bite the dust. To
avoid such a calamity to the individual, as well as to the
world around him, a severe warning must necessarily be
given; and these two closing stanzas contain such a
warning.
1149
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HE WHO DISOBEYS THE SHASTRAS AND ACTS
UNDER THE IMPULSE OF DESIRE --- Such a man stands
to gain no benefit at all. Here the term Shastra need not
necessarily be understood as a bundle of ritualistic
injunctions, strictly followed and sacredly insisted upon
by the fanatic orthodox. The text-books discussing the
Theory-of-Truth (Brahma-Vidya) and the technique of self-
perfection (Yoga) are called Shastras, while other
subsidiary books which explain and throw light upon the
Shastras are called Prakarana texts; the latter explain the
categories in the Science of Vedanta. Since the Geeta is a
philosophical poem, exhaustively explaining the theory
and practice of God-realisation, IT IS CONSIDERED AS A
Shastra.
UNDER THE IMPULSE OF DESIRE --- The theme
developed in the previous two stanzas is that a seeker of
the Higher, should of necessity renounce "desire, anger,
and greed." We have explained earlier that ANGER is a
product when desire is throttled, and GREED is a logical
consequence when a passionate heart gains some
fulfilment of desires. Therefore, desire is the root cause.
Naturally, Krishna contrasts the way-of-life advocated in
the Geeta with our ordinary way-of-life, wherein the main
impulse is desire. The seekers are advised not to disobey
the commands given in the Geeta Shastra and live under
the impulse of their baser appetites and lower instincts.
ATTAINS NEITHER JOY NOR SUCCESS, NOR GOAL ---
What exactly would be the harm if one did not implicitly
1150
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
live the way-of-life advocated in the Geeta? The
consequences of such an unintelligent and naughty
disregard of the right-way-of-life is clearly indicated here.
Propelled by desires, coaxed by greed, torn by anger and
constantly dancing to the changing tunes of the lusty
flesh, an individual comes to live a life of restless
agitations and tyrannical passions. Such a man cannot feel
any happiness or attain any cultural development.
THEREFORE THE NATURAL CONCLUSION IS:
24. Therefore, let the Scriptures be your authority, in
determining what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done. Having known what is said in the commandments of the
Scripture, you should act here (in this world) .
THEREFORE --- Because of the line of argument given in
the last three stanzas, the seeker of an ampler life must
necessarily follow the authority of the Scriptures in
planning his way-of-life. The right conduct in life can be
determined only when the individual has correct
knowledge of WHAT IS TO BE PURSUED AND WHAT
IS TO BE AVOIDED. The grand road to Truth is the same
for all. It cannot be determined by each pilgrim according
to his own whims and fancies. Shastras are declared by
those, who had travelled the road many a time. And when
the Rishis supply us with a map of the road-to-Perfection,
we, the humble pedestrians, must pursue the path
faithfully and come to bless ourselves.
1151
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HAVING KNOWN --- Therefore, before setting out on a
pilgrimage to that Goal, every seeker is required to study
intelligently the Scriptures, which are the reports left for
our guidance by those who successfully walked the 'Path'
earlier. A correct knowledge and a clear intellectual vision
of the Goal and of the direction in which It lies, and
perhaps, of the possible difficulties en route --- are the
unavoidable pre-requisites for a seeker.
YOU SHOULD ACT HERE --- Ninety per cent of the
seekers, perhaps, 'know' the Shastra exhaustively, in all
detail as explained above, but alas, how few of them
discover in themselves the courage to live, the will to
pursue, and the patience to wait till the Supreme is
realised within themselves. Naturally, Lord Krishna closes
the chapter with the injunction that man should act,
without desire, anger, or greed. This is the right way of
action as exhaustively discussed in the third chapter on
Karma yoga).
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the sixteenth
discourse ends entitled: THE DIVINE AND THE DEVILISH
ESTATES
Om Om Om Om Om
1152
