Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 13
Kshetra Kshetrajna Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of the Field and the Knower of the Field
Arjuna said: 1. PRAKRITI (Matter) and PURUSHA (Spirit) ,
also the KSHETRA (the Field) and KSHETRAJNA (the
Knower-of-the-Field) , Knowledge and that which ought to be
known --- these, I wish to learn, O Keshava.
In several manuscripts, this stanza is not found. But in
some others, it is met with as a doubt expressed by
Arjuna.
PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA --- In the Sankhyan Philosophy
in India, the Acharyas have used these two technical terms
to indicate the inert-equipments (Prakriti) and the vital
sentient-Truth (Purusha) that sets the entire assemblage of
matter in action. In short, Prakriti is matter and Purusha is
the Spirit. The Spirit, in Itself, has no expression except
when It plays through matter. When Purusha weds
Prakriti, the experiences of good and bad are in legion
born. Electricity, in itself, cannot manifest as light. But
when it weds the bulb, it is manifested as light.
914
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE FIELD AND THE KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD --- We
have already explained these two terms in our
introduction to this chapter. The "KNOWER-OF-THE-
FIELD" is the status of the Knowing-Principle when It is
functioning in the "FIELD-OF-THE-KNOWN." Bereft of
the field-of-objects, the "Knower" himself becomes nothing
but "Pure Knowledge," without the functions of knowing
attached to It.
THE MECHANISM AND THE OBJECTS-OF
KNOWLEDGE --- Conditioned knowledge-bits, meaning,
knowledge-of-things, are the constant experiences of all
living creatures in life. Naturally, an investigation into the
"mechanism of knowing" and
its manipulations and the "true object to be known" will be
helpful to all seekers.
LISTEN, HOW THE LORD ANSWERS ALL THESE
QUESTIONS CATEGORICALLY:
The Blessed Lord said: 2. This body, O Kaunteya is called
KSHETRA (the Field) and he who knows it is called
KSHETRAJNA (the Knower-of-the-Field) by those who know
them (KSHETRA and KSHETRAJNA) i. e. , by the sages .
The experience of Perfection is subjective. The Vedantic
seers of Hindu Scriptures are unanimous in their
conclusion that a subjective quest is the "path" to
915
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
rediscover and ultimately realise the Self. In this chapter,
we find a beautiful philosophical dissection of the
subjective structure of man, exposing the matter
envelopments that condition the Spirit. A discriminative
knowledge of the matter layers, as distinct from the
"Spiritual-Core," will show the seeker the way to
rediscover his identity with the Spirit, and realise the
actual non-existence of matter, when viewed from the
realm of the Spirit.
A "waker" in a certain mental frame-work, himself
becomes a "dreamer," and, to the "dreamer" the dream is
real as long as the dream continues. But on awakening, the
"dreamer" realises that the dream was only a
misinterpretation of the waking, rendered by the
"dreamer's" own mind. Similarly, the pluralistic world is
perceived when the Spirit views through its own
imaginary world of matter, and on awakening to Its own
spiritual status it rediscovers Its own Absolute Reality in
which the "phantom" of matter has no existence at all.
Thus, in a living man, philosophically viewed, there are
two aspects: the inert and insentient matter-layers, and the
sentient and vital Consciousness. These two aspects are
defined in this stanza.
THIS BODY O! SON OF KUNTI, IS CALLED THE FIELD -
-- In this mechanical age, it is very easy to understand that
there must be a 'field' for energy to play in, and that, then
alone it can manifest as work done and serve man. Steam-
916
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
energy cannot be resolved into locomotion unless it is
made to pass through a steam-engine. Electricity cannot
give us breeze unless it passes through the machine of a
fan. The equipments (or assembly of matter layers),
through which Life passes when an individuality is
expressed, are defined here by Krishna as the "Field."
HE WHO KNOWS IT, IS CALLED THE "KNOWER-OF-
THE-FIELD" --- This field is made up of lifeless matter, the
minerals. And yet, as long as it lives and functions, it
KNOWS. This "principle-of-knowing," functioning in the
"field" is the "enjoyer-of-the-field;" the "knower," the EGO.
As long as life exists in any living organism, it expresses
an urge to know. The degree of this urge may vary from
individual to individual in the Universe. But the urge to
know, expressed through an equipment, is what we
recognise as its life. The capacity of an organism to receive
stimuli and send forth responses is the transaction of life,
and when this "knower" --- the individuality, has departed
from the equipment, we consider it as dead. This is the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Kshetrajna).
BY THOSE WHO KNOW OF THEM --- Here, Lord
Krishna has assured his listeners that the definitions given
by him to the terms "body" and the "knower-of-the-body"
are not arbitrary declarations or hypothetical
suppositions, but are in keeping with the actual
experiences of all the great Masters of yore. In short, here
we have a definition of matter (Kshetra) and the Spirit
917
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
functioning through it (Kshetrajna). The entire world-of-
objects constitutes the kingdom of matter; and the vital
knower of the world-of-matter, constituted of the
equipments and their array of perceptions, feelings and
thoughts, is the Spirit.
IS THIS ALL THE KNOWLEDGE THAT ONE HAS TO
ACQUIRE ABOUT THEM? --- NO, --- LISTEN:
3. Know Me as the "Knower-of-the-Field" in all "Fields, " O
Bharata; Knowledge of the "Field" as also of the "knower-of-the-
Field" is considered by Me to be My Knowledge.
After indicating, in the previous stanza, the world-of-
matter and the thrilling Spirit-of-Truth that presides over
it, here is a staggering announcement, "I AM THE
KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD IN ALL FIELDS." If, in all
"Fields" the "Knower" is one, then the plurality is only in
the matter-envelopments, and the Life that presides over
them is one everywhere. This Universal One, the
Transcendental Truth is indicated here by the first person
singular "I AM" because every seeker has to rediscover in
himself, "That I am" (Soham).
We had already indicated earlier that Lord Krishna is
expounding the Geeta in a rare moment of Yogic
integration (Yogarudha state). He is identifying himself
with the Self that is everywhere. This is something like
918
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
electricity declaring: "I am the one energy that gives the
glow in all filaments all over the world."
After indicating the One Spirit behind the entire world-of-
matter, wherever it may be, Krishna declares that,
according to Him, a correct knowledge (vitally
experienced and lived) of what constitutes in each one of
us the perishable, changeable, finite, inert matter, and of
the nature of the Infinite, Imperishable and Sentient Spirit
--- is the Supreme Knowledge. Kshetra is the field-of-
matter which is constituted of the various equipments of
perception and the vast fields of the perceived. Kshetrajna
is the subject that enjoys the activities of the instruments
of perception and the world perceived by them. To
distinguish the world-of-the-subject from the world-of-
the-objects is the salutary Knowledge, which can redeem
us from the confusions and sorrows from which we suffer
today as individualised egos.
SINCE A PRECISE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD OF
SUBJECT AND OF THE OBJECTS IS UNAVOIDABLE TO
A TRUE SEEKER WALKING THE PATH OF
KNOWLEDGE, WE WILL HAVE TO MAKE AN
EXHAUSTIVE STUDY OF THEM. THEREFORE:
4. What that Field is; of what nature it is; what are its
modifications; whence it is; and also who He is; and what His
powers are --- these hear from Me in brief.
919
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OF WHAT NATURE --- Not only are we going to have a
discussion of what constitutes the "Field", the Kshetra, but
also of what it is in itself. "OF WHAT NATURE", meaning,
what are its properties. "AND WHENCE IS WHAT"
meaning, what effects arise from what causes i. e. what are
the by-products when it changes its form? What is its
origin? Who is He, the Knowing Principle in the field?
What are His powers of perception, feeling and thought?
All these "HEAR, BRIEFLY FROM ME."
A mere repetition of the qualities of the Infinite Self is, in
itself, of no profit at all to a true seeker. Nor can any
evolution actually take place by an over-emphasis of the
qualities of the Spirit. To close our eyes to the causes that
create our present problems is not to solve the problems.
The world-of-matter that has been projected by ourselves
around us and the process by which we work through it
to perceive the infinite varieties of objects, feelings and
thoughts --- all these are to be brought under our close
observation and study. To ignore them is to cheat
ourselves so much about the "essential knowledge."
At least a working knowledge of the enemy's strategy is
essential in planning our anti-strategic movements. To
know the nature of all matter envelopments --- their play,
and how they behave under given sets of different
circumstances --- is to know the "Field" where we have to
battle for release and win our victory.
920
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus physiology, biology, psychology and all the natural
sciences have a real quota of help to give us. The spiritual
"path," especially the 'Path-of-Knowledge,' is the
culmination and the fulfilment of the secular sciences. This
is very well brought out by the fact that, when Lord
Krishna, even in the midst of the battle-front, is trying to
explain the secrets of the Spirit to the warrior Arjuna, He
does not fail to emphasise the importance of a close study
of the "Field" provided by the world-of-matter.
IN ORDER TO CREATE A LIVELY ENTHUSIASM IN
THE STUDENTS TO OBSERVE, STUDY AND
UNDERSTAND THE WORLD-OF-MATTER AROUND
THE SPIRIT, KRISHNA IS GLORIFYING THE VERY
THEME OF THIS CHAPTER. LISTEN:
5. RISHIS have sung (about the "Field" and the "Knower-of-
the-Field" ) in many ways, in various distinctive chants and
also in the suggestive words indicative of BRAHMAN, full of
reason and decision.
The explanations that are to follow are not idle talk, or
clever intellectual manifestations, springing from the
fertile imagination of Shri Krishna. In the entire discourse,
(in Chapter XIII itself) Krishna assures us that what He
explains is only a healthy restatement of what "HAS BEEN
SUNG BY THE RISHIS IN MANY WAYS, IN DIFFERENT
HYMNS, SEVERALLY." In short, the subject-matter dealt
921
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
with here is the very theme which the Upanishads have
indicated in their secret verses, especially so "in its
passages about Brahman."
Why should we so readily accept these statements of the
Rishis in the Upanishads except in a stunned admiration
nurtured by our blind belief in them? Krishna points out
that even if we had no great respect or reverence for the
Rishis as such, we will have to accept their declarations
because they are not intellectual dictations, or divine
commandments, thrust upon the helpless laity by some
winged angels assuming divine prerogative and claiming
special sources of secret knowledge. This is the general
attitude that poisons the scriptures of almost all other
religions. As a contrast to them, our Upanisadic declarations
are "FULL OF REASONING AND SO CONVINCING."
When a truth is declared, along with logical reasoning, the
conclusions arrived at are acceptable to any intelligent
student by the sheer force of its appeal.
WHEN ARJUNA IS THUS PREPARED TO LISTEN
ATTENTIVELY TO THE DISCOURSE OF THE "FIELD"
AND ITS "KNOWER," THE LORD SAYS:
6. The great elements, egoism, intellect, and also the
unmanifested (MOOLA-PRAKRITI) , the ten senses and the
one (the mind) and the five objects-of-the-senses, . . .
922
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
7. Desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, aggregate (body) , intelligence,
fortitude --- this KSHETRA has been thus briefly described
with its modifications.
From here onwards, the promised themes for discussion
are taken up one by one by the teacher and upon each of
them He gives an exhaustive exposition. These two verses,
enumerate the various items together constituting the
"Field" (Kshetra), which was indicated in a previous stanza
(Ibid., verse 2.) as "this body" (Idam Shariram).
"THE GREAT ELEMENTS" (Mahabhutas) --- They are five
in number --- space, air, fire, water and earth. They are the
rudimentary elements (tanmatras) out of the combinations
of which the grosser elements --- indicated here in the
stanza by the term "Perceptible" (Indriya-gocharaah) Great
Elements --- are formed.
THE EGOISM (Ahamkara) --- This is the sense of "I"-ness
and "My"-ness that arises in us in our identification with
the world-of-objects. It is this that is the 'perceiver' and
'enjoyer' of this world, and that enjoys and suffers the joys
and sorrows of its own world of likes and dislikes, loves
and hatreds, and ever weeps in its innumerable
attachments in the world outside. The individuality
arising out of our relationships with the world-of-matter,
is called the "Ego."
INTELLECT (Buddhi) --- The 'determining-faculty' which
rationally thinks and comes to its own conclusions and
923
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
judges good and bad in every experience of a living man
is called the intellect.
UNMANIFESTED (Avyakta) --- That which rules the
functions of a given mind and intellect, and determines
their activities in the world-outside, is the unmanifested
factor called the "vasanas." The impressions, left over in the
mental equipment as a result of our conscious enjoyment
of the world-outside, determine the direction and the
pattern of all our subsequent perceptions and feelings.
Mental capacities and intellectual decisions are
determined in each individual, and his aptitudes are
ordered by the type of impressions (vasanas) left over in
his subtle-body as a result of his previous ego-centric
existence amidst the world-of-objects. This source of all
individual activities is the residual vasanas in the
individual. Naturally, therefore, in its macrocosmic aspect,
the total universe of men and things, and their behaviours,
must spring from the total vasanas is called in Sanskrit as
the "Moola-Prakriti" by the Sankhyans, or as Maya by the
Vedantins. The Supreme functioning through Maya (Moola-
Prakriti) is the Creator of the total Universe; and the same
Supreme, functioning through the vasana-layers in the
individual (Avidya), is the creator, sustainer and destroyer
of the individual life, the "Ego."
From this, it is so evident that the Unmanifested is but the
unseen cause, total vasanas, which has manifested as the
"seen" --- the world-of-objects.
924
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE TEN SENSES --- The five sense organs of perception
and the five sense organs of action are the vehicles by
which each individual perceives the stimuli and responds
to them.
THE ONE (Ekam) --- In the context here, this stands for the
mind. Even though the sense organs are many, the faculty
in us that receives all the stimuli, from all the five avenues
of perception, is one and the same, the mind. Not only
does the mind receive the stimuli but it also executes the
judgement of the intellect and sends forth responses to the
outer-world. It is again the only outlet for the individual
personality to express through. The "one" here, therefore,
represents the mind.
THE FIVE OBJECTS OF THE SENSES --- Each sense organ
has only one definite field of sense objects to perceive. The
eyes can perceive only forms; the ears can listen to sounds;
the nose can smell; the tongue can taste; and the skin can
perceive the touches. No one of the sense organs can
perceive the objects of the other sense organs. Thus, there
are five distinct types of sense objects. And, in fact, the
entire gross world perceived is nothing other than a play
of all these five types of sense objects.
The twenty-four factors so far enumerated are the famous
24 principles (Tattwas) of the Sankhyan Philosophy.
Lord Krishna, in enumerating the items constituting the
"Field," does not stop with these gross equipments-of-
925
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
matter; but includes even their "modifications" such as
desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the assemblage of the body
(Samghata), intelligence, steadfastness, etc. In short not
only do the gross body, mind and intellect constitute the
entire world-of-objects, but even the perceptions
experienced through them, the world-of-objects, the
emotions and thoughts are also included in the all-
comprehensive term; the "Field" (Kshetram) --- "this body"
(Idam Shariram).
Anything other than the subject belongs to the world-of-
objects, and can be perceived as an object. Mental,
emotional, and intellectual ideas are also the objects of our
knowledge, and therefore, with reference to the Subject all
that is seen, felt, or known are but objects. This entire
world-of-objects is indicated in the Geeta in this chapter
by the phrase "this body" --- the "Field."
In a word, the entire world of "knowable" together in a
bunch, can be labelled as the Field (Kshetra). And the
Knowing-Principle, seemingly functioning as the
"Knower" (Kshetrajna), is the Subject. To distinguish the
Subject from the world-of-objects, an exhaustive
understanding of what constitutes the object is necessary.
Hence this elaborate enumeration. The entire world-of-
matter in the cosmos has been directly, as well as by
implication, embraced in these two stanzas.
The following section, constituted of five consecutive
verses together, lists twenty qualities, which in their
926
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
totality indicate the "Knower" (Kshetrajna). In fact, the
"Knower-of-the-Field" is directly described (in XIII-12)
but, in the following couplets, (in XIII-8 to 12) certain
mental and emotional attributes, moral attitudes and
ethical principles are prescribed since they are essential
pre-requisites for the seeker who is anxious to apprehend
and experience the Infinite Self.
THEY ARE ENUMERATED AS FOLLOWS:
8. Humility, unpretentiousness, non-injury, forgiveness,
uprightness, service to the teacher, purity, steadfastness, self-
control . . .
From this stanza onwards, we get a description of the
elements of "Knowledge" and they include moral qualities
and ascetic practices which are conducive to spiritual
awakening.
HUMILITY --- meaning, absence of self-esteem;
MODESTY --- the virtue of not proclaiming one's own
greatness; NON-INJURY --- to any living being mainly by
our own vicious intentions and feelings; FORGIVENESS
(PATIENCE) --- capacity to suffer long without being
upset; UPRIGHTNESS --- comes to him who harmonises
thoughts, words and deeds, and who is intent on right
conduct; SERVICE TO THE TEACHER --- not merely
physical, for real service to the teacher is an attempt on the
part of the student to seek a mental and intellectual
927
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
identity with the teacher's pure heart and intellect;
PURITY --- not merely the cleanliness of the seeker's
thoughts and physical structure, but also of his dress and
other belongings and of the environments in which he is
living. It also comprehends the inner purity of thoughts
and emotions, intentions and motives, passions and urges;
STEADFASTNESS --- consistency of purpose and
concentration of all efforts towards achieving the cultural
and the spiritual goal striven for; SELF-CONTROL --- self-
restraint practised at all the personality-layers, both in
their collective and several contacts with the world
outside...
MOREOVER:
9. Indifference to the objects of the sense, and also absence of
egoism, perception of (or reflection upon) evils in birth, death,
old age, sickness and pain. . .
ABSENCE OF ATTACHMENT FOR OBJECTS --- This
does not mean running away from the objects-of-the-
world. Living in the midst of these objects, to switch off
our mental pre-occupations with them; living amidst the
objects detachedly and not getting shackled by them ---
this is meant here by the term Vairagya. To run away from
the objects and to indulge in them mentally amounts to
suppressions, and such a suppressed individual is labelled
(in III-6) as a hypocrite (Mithya-chara) by the Lord Himself.
928
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ABANDONMENT OF THE THOUGHT OF 'I' --- The
individuality-sense comes only when we identify
ourselves with the equipments and their perceptions. To
reduce this delusory misconception of ourselves is an
essential pre-requisite for asserting and living our own
real divine nature. This is equivalent to the weeding that
must precede planting in any field of cultivation.
PERCEPTION OF THE EVIL OF PAIN --- Feeling of
discontentment with the available situation alone can
goad us to discover a new state of existence. Whether it be
a nation, a community or a society, as long as they are not
aware of the fact that their present conditions are
despicable and tragic, they will adapt themselves to living
in that condition oblivious of their sorrows. Every political
or social worker first makes the people understand their
present state of degradation and destitution. When such
realisation comes to them, they are ready with all
enthusiasm, to seek fresh fields of greater joys and a fuller
life.
The same technique is applicable in the culture field.
Unless a seeker is fully conscious of the inward
personality-shackles in himself, he will live on in his own
ditch of sorrows, never striving to get out of it. Both the
human mind and body have a tremendous amount of
adaptability. They can adapt themselves to any condition
and even come to enjoy them.
929
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Unless a seeker is constantly conscious of the evil of the
pain in his present stage of existence, he will not discover
the necessary spiritual urge, intellectual dynamism,
emotional enthusiasm or physical courage to seek, to fight
for, to win, and to possess the Divine Fields of Perfection.
IN BIRTH, DEATH, OLD AGE, AND SICKNESS --- Every
physical body in the world, goes through these
modifications; and each one of them is an inlet for fresh
sources of sorrow. Birth, growth, decay, disease and death
are the tragic destinies of all living equipments. In all
these stages of our metamorphosis, to constantly
recognize pain is to feel an impatience with it. This sense
of revolt against pain is the fuel that drives the seekers
faster and faster to seek the Peaks of Perfection.
MOREOVER:
10. Non-attachment; non-identification of Self with son, wife,
home and the rest; and constant even-mindedness on the
attainment of the desirable and the undesirable. . .
NON-ATTACHMENT --- The mind's sticking on to the
various objects of the world with extreme liking for them
is called attachment. It is the mental contacts with the
world-outside that bring agitations into the mind. It
dances a number to the tune of death to which the finite
objects of the world most often dance. Fire in itself cannot
burn, but a child gets its fingers burnt, not because of the
930
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
fire but because its fingers, propelled by a force called
desire, come in actual CONTACT with fire.
ABSENCE OF EXCESSIVE LOVE FOR CHILD, WIFE,
HOME AND THE LIKE --- Excessive love, or affection, is
an intense form of attachment to another. It consists in our
total identification with the object of our affection. The
lover loses his personal identity in his identification with
the beloved to such an extent, that he is happy or
sorrowful when she lives in joy or suffers from pain. Such
an intimate relationship is generally met with in the
attachment of a mother to its child.
To build a wall of discrimination around our inner
personality and to keep such disturbances away is to
discover the equipoise in ourselves --- without which no
progress or growth is ever possible.
With a little practice, this evenness of mind can be
maintained unbroken in all situations of life ---
DESIRABLE and UNDESIRABLE. A human mind,
relieved from its pre-occupations with its own present
attachments and affections, unintelligent though they be,
will discover in itself a tremendous amount of surplus
energy conserved, which might flow into dangerous
channels unless rightly directed.
THE RIGHT CHANNELLING OF THIS NEWLY
DISCOVERED ENERGY IS INDICATED BELOW:
931
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
11. Unswerving devotion unto Me by the YOGA of non-
separation, resorting to solitary places, distaste for the society of
men. . .
Perhaps compelled by the nature of Arjuna, a man of
action, or perhaps forced by the very spirit of the reformer
in the Yogeshwara, the Divine Song, as it comes to us, is the
most practical textbook on Self-rediscovery. The moment
the Geeta-Acharya advises his disciple to develop any
given mental or intellectual beauty, he always suggests a
practical method by which this can actually be
accomplished.
If a seeker tries to develop in himself the virtues described
in the previous three stanzas --- not only in his inward life
but also in all his contacts with the world around him, it is
certain that he, an ordinary man of the world, will thereby
conserve in himself a lot of energy. This stanza describes
the right application of this conserved energy in proper
channels so as to profit thereby and gain a better Self-
unfoldment.
UNFLINCHING DEVOTION TO ME --- Concentration is
the focussing of the mind upon a particular point to the
exclusion of all mental excitements and agitations. This
steadiness in contemplation may be destroyed by causes
arising at two different points --- either in the individual's
own mind or in the object contemplated upon. Unless
both are steady, concentration cannot be successful. If our
932
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
devotion wavers from idol to idol, then our practice of
concentration will get unsteady, because the point-of-
attention becomes ever-changing. Therefore, it is said that
unflinching devotion towards Me, the Self, is one of the
conditions necessary for steady progress and growth in
Yoga.
BY THE YOGA OF NON-SEPARATION --- Undivided
attention and enthusiasm in the mind of the devotee is
another condition that will accomplish better
concentration. Otherwise the mind may revolt against its
own devoted self-application, and will, either partially or
wholly, wander away into its own delusory
enchantments. A certain amount of steadiness of purpose
is to be maintained by the mind. Wild imaginations and
futile day-dreaming are the preoccupations of only a
disintegrated mind.
The typical expression used here by Shri Krishna to
indicate the abject and despicable vacillations of the
human mind at the seat of Yoga clearly shows the force
with which he wants to condemn such vacillations. He
says, the mind should be "unprostituting" with its point-
of-contemplation. Prostitution denotes an attitude of
selling away one's own capabilities and beauties for the
sake of some paltry profit heedless of the higher bonds of
faithfulness and chastity. A mind, wedded to the Lord, is
a mind at faithful contemplation. The warning "not to
prostitute" is indeed very powerful to express that the
point-of-concentration should not be at a crowd of deities
933
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
or a host of ideas, but must faithfully serve some chosen
single ideal.
Similarly, the other powerful expression used in the
stanza is "the Yoga of non-otherness" (Ananya-Yoga).
Inspired as He is, the Yogeshwara coins a new and
powerful phrase on the spur of the moment to bring a new
fire into his re-interpretation of the ancient Hindu way of
life and techniques of self-culture.
Such an integrated life of stable mind, and steady
contemplation upon a firm ideal is impossible, unless the
practitioner works in a conducive environment. This is
prescribed in the two indirect advices (a) TO RESORT TO
SOLITARY PLACES and (b) TO DEVLOP A DISTASTE
FOR THE CROWDED SOCIETY LIFE. The more
integrated the personality grows and the more maddening
becomes its enthusiasm for the quest of that which is dear
to its heart, the more it automatically lives alone in itself
away from the noisy crowd. This is true of every thinker --
- be he a poet, be he a scientific research-scholar or be he a
man with an acute problem. Whenever the mind is
fascinated by an enchanting ideal, it loses all its contact
with other preoccupations and becomes wedded faithfully
to its own all-absorbing theme of interest.
Thereafter --- just a poet lives in his own world, just as the
scientist is a solitary man even in the market-place --- the
devotee also enters a cave of his own experiences and he
walks alone in the world. He hates other thoughts
934
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
entering his mind, and so lives alone in himself. These two
terms should not be misunderstood as physical escapism
into a tomb-like solitude, or as a physical aversion to the
society of men.
MOREOVER:
12. Constancy in Self-knowledge, perception of the end of true
knowledge --- this is declared to be "knowledge, " and what is
opposed to it is "ignorance. "
In this concluding stanza of this section, explaining the
various essential qualifications in a seeker, the Lord adds
to the aforesaid list EIGHTEEN qualifications, Two more
items, viz., "constancy in Self-knowledge" and
"understanding the end of the true Knowledge."
CONSTANCY IN SELF-KNOWLEDGE --- The
Knowledge of the Self is to be lived and not to be merely
learnt. If the Self is one everywhere and the Self alone is
real, the seeker should try to live as the Self at all levels of
his personality. The constancy of living the 'Spiritual-
knowledge' at all levels of one's contacts with the world-
outside, is one of the unavoidable practices a seeker
should always keep up.
UNDERSTANDING THE END OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE -
-- To remember constantly the goal of our endeavour is to
add more enthusiasm to our activities. Sincerity of
935
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
purpose in, and undying devotion to, any endeavour can
be had only if the seeker is thrilled by the vision of the
goal that he has to reach. Thus, the "end" should be kept in
view. Liberation (Moksha) from all our imperfections and
limitations, is the "end" striven for by all spiritual seekers.
The attributes are declared to be "Knowledge" because
they are conducive to the final Realisation of the Self.
A train in full steam waiting for the signal at a platform, is
generally described as "Madras is ready to leave now." In
the language of the Railway Station, it is usual to say ---
"Delhi is expected," "Calcutta is late," "Bombay has left,"
etc. In each of these cases only the train leaving for, or
coming from, these various cities is meant. Similarly here,
the very qualities are called the "Knowledge" (Jnana)
because, once these qualities have been fully developed,
the mind so cultivated becomes the ready vehicle to go
forward and it is easier to reach the goal, the Pure
Knowledge of the Self.
WHAT IS THAT WHICH HAS TO BE KNOWN BY THE
KNOWLEDGE? IN ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION IT IS
SAID:
13. I will declare that which has to be "known" knowing which
one attains to Immortality --- the beginningless Supreme
BRAHMAN, called neither being nor non-being.
936
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After explaining, in the previous section of five verses, the
various secondary or auxiliary steps-in-aid for
"Knowledge," the Lord promises that He will explain
"WHAT IS TO BE KNOWN." There are critics who allege
that though Krishna, the teacher, promises that He will
explain "WHAT IS TO BE KNOWN," He does not directly
do so, but merely gives an elaborate description of what is
the RESULT of gaining such a "Knowledge." This criticism
is unfair. The glorification of the result of "Knowledge"
can create in the hearer a greater desire to realise it.
KNOWING WHICH, ONE ATTAINS THE IMMORTAL --
- Mortality is the destiny of matter. Identifying with the
finite, the Immortal Spirit Itself is conditioned by matter
and suffers the delusory sense of finitude and mortality.
To rediscover the Spiritual Nature in itself and to live that
glory is to end the fearful concept and experience of death,
and to enter into a field of joyous Spiritual Nature. This is
the goal, for accomplishing which, our inner-equipments
of meditation are to be properly tuned up by the
disciplines already described.
WITHOUT BEGINNING, THE HIGHEST BRAHMAN
(Anaadimat-param) --- A beginning can be conceived and
calculated only with reference to what is the substratum of
all, which substratum must be existent even before Time.
Thus, the Supreme is always considered as
"beginningless." From the Supreme even Time is born.
937
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Supreme Consciousness, which is the "illuminator" of
all experiences and which exists, transcending all realms
of experiences, cannot be caught within the web of our
perceptions --- It being the very Perceiving-Principle in all
equipments. With reference to It, everything else is an
"object." It is the one Subject, and since it cannot be
perceived, felt or thought of, It is not said to be existent
(Sat).
Nor can Truth be defined as non-existent, such as the sky-
flower or man's tail, for It manifests as the world.
Therefore, Truth can be defined only as "neither sat nor
asat." The Supreme Brahman cannot be characterised either
positively or negatively.
Shankara says that "Brahman cannot be existent (Sat) as it
belong to no GENUS, nor possesses any qualities, but at
the same time It shows Itself to be not asat by manifesting
Itself through living bodies."
In fact these concepts of "Sat" and "Asat" are judgements of
the human mind and intellect. The Consciousness that
illumines these judgements is the Self. The illuminator and
the illumined cannot be one and the same. Therefore, the
one Subject, the Brahman, as opposed to all 'objects,'
cannot be either Existent or non-Existent, because 'Sat' and
'Asat' are two types of thought-waves, and the Self
illumines them both. That Brahman is "NEITHER BEING,
NOR NON-BEING" is all that the scriptures can declare.
938
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DESCRIBING THE ALL-PERVADING SELF CONSCIOUS
PRINCIPLE, WE HAVE THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
14. With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads and
mouths everywhere, with ears everywhere, He exists in the
world, enveloping all.
WITH HANDS AND FEET EVERYWHERE --- It is easier
to describe an unmanifest power for the comprehension of
students of lesser calibre, when the unknown principle is
defined in terms of the known. Though the hands and legs
of the living creatures are made up of inert matter, they
seem to be quite conscious and vital in their movements.
This Principle of Consciousness, functioning behind them
all, everywhere, is one and the same Self, the Supreme
Brahman, indicated by the expression "POSSESSING
HANDS AND FEET EVERYWHERE."
Every eye, head and mouth functions in the world
because of the Life that pulsates through it. Life is one
everywhere. Therefore, that Life Principle is described
here as "EVERYWHERE POSSESSING EYES AND EARS
AND MOUTHS." All activities of perception, feeling and
thinking are successively pursued only as long as Life
presides over the body, and therefore, the One Life is
defined here as "EVERYWHERE POSSESSING EYES,
ETC."
939
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THAT EXISTS PERVADING ALL --- If this Principle of
Consciousness is defined as functioning through known
physical equipments, the student may doubt that Life, like
stars studding the sky, expresses itself only wherever
equipments function. To remove this fallacious idea, it is
rightly said that the Truth, the Principle of Consciousness,
"EXISTS PERVADING ALL." This is reminiscent of the
famous hymn to the Cosmic-man (Purusha Sooktam) in the
Rig Veda.
CONTINUING THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ETERNAL
TRUTH THE LORD SAYS:
15. Shining by the functions of all the senses, yet without the
senses; unattached, yet supporting all; devoid of qualities, yet
their experiencer. . .
One of the ways of defining the indefinable Supreme, the
subject in the seeker himself, is to indicate It in a language
of contradiction, which, without confusing the intellect,
tickles it to a special kind of activity, thereby facilitating
the realisation of the Eternal. The language of
contradiction is the characteristic feature of all scriptural
text-books. Hasty readers of the Scriptures quote these
lines to justify their scepticism, or atheistic tendencies.
This stanza is met with in the Upanishads also.
SEEMING TO POSSESS THE FUNCTIONS OF ALL
SENSES YET DEVOID OF ALL SENSES --- The Self in us,
940
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
while functioning through the equipment, the sense
organs, and conditioned by them, looks as though It has
all the sense organs. But when we analyse, we have to
admit that the sense organs are material and that they
decay and perish, while the Consciousness --- functioning
in and through them and providing each of them with its
own individual faculty, is Itself Eternal, and Changeless.
The Truth, while functioning through the sense organs,
looks AS THOUGH It possesses them. But in fact, It has
Itself none of these faculties.
Electricity is not the light in the bulb, nor the heat in the
heater; yet while functioning through the bulb, or the
heater, and conditioned by them, the same Electricity
looks AS THOUGH it is light or fire.
DETACHED, YET UPHOLDING ALL --- This relationship
of "detached support" is not too easy for the initiate to
understand. But it is generally brought within our
comprehension by the great teachers of our country
through analogies. No wave is all the ocean; all the waves
put together are also not the entire ocean. We cannot say
the ocean is attached to the waves since the ocean is the
very nature of the waves and, though detached, all the
waves are always supported by none other than the ocean
itself. Cotton is in all cloth; cloth is not cotton. And yet, it
is the cotton in the cloth that "supports" the cloth.
Similarly, the world of plurality is not Consciousness. Yet
Consciousness supports it. Between the ghost and the
941
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
post, no attachment is ever possible and yet, the post alone
is the "support" of the ghost --- as the waking mind alone
can support the "dreams."
WITHOUT GUNAS, YET ENJOYING ALL GUNAS --- The
moods in which, and influences under which, human
minds come to play and experience themselves are called
"gunas." These are influences that govern the mind and yet
they are the objects of realisation or perception for the
Conscious Self. A live mind alone can experience these
influences. Consciousness conditioned by the mind is the
Ego (Jiva), and is the experiencer (Bhoktri) of the guna.
Unconditioned by the mind, in Its own nature, It is the
Absolute.
Thus, in the stanza, the Self, as the Absolute, is described
as beyond the sense organs, mind and intellect and
detached from everything and without any relation to the
various gunas.
But the same Self, conditioned by the sense organs, looks
AS THOUGH possessing them all, and proves AS
THOUGH It is the sustainer of them all, and expresses
Itself AS THOUGH It is the experiencer of all the gunas.
NOT ONLY THIS, BUT THE SELF, FUNCTIONING IN
AN INDIVIDUAL, IS THE ONE SELF IN ALL:
942
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
16. Without and within (all) beings, the 'unmoving' and also
the 'moving' ; because of its subtlety unknowable; and near and
far away --- is That.
The all-pervasiveness of the Principle of Consciousness is
indicated here in the inimitable style borrowed from the
Upanishads.
WITHOUT AND WITHIN ALL THINGS --- The
Conscious Principle that bursts Itself into activity through
the various individualised equipments is all-pervading
and is, therefore, in an unmanifest condition. It is present
even where no special equipment is available. Even
though we can listen to our national radio broadcasts only
through available receiving sets, we cannot say that there
are no electrical sound-waves in places where there are no
receiving sets. Where there is a body, mind and intellect
ready to function, there, no doubt, is the expression of
Consciousness. But Consciousness is All-pervading not
only within the equipment but even outside it.
The phrase quoted can also be interpreted as 'WITHOUT
THE BEINGS AND YET WITHIN THEM ALSO.'
Something like this: the ocean is without the waves and is
something other than the waves and, yet, the very mass of
each wave is nothing but the ocean itself.
MOVING AND UNMOVING --- All that moves of its own
volition is "alive" and that which has no motion falls
under the category of the "inert". This phrase is sometimes
943
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
explained as "UNMOVING AND YET MOVING,"
wherein the Truth, in Its Absolute nature is motionless ---
there is no place where It can move since It is All --- yet,
conditioned by the things moving, IT LOOKS AS
THOUGH it has movement. SITTING in a bus you can
TRAVEL a long distance; yourself only sitting! Thus the
bus travels, and therefore, in yourself though there is no
motion, yet you, conditioned by (meaning, carried by) the
bus, are the traveller.
Thus there is an Eternal, All-perfect Principle, revelling as
the very core in our personality, which is not only within
but which is everywhere --- without which no activity is
ever possible, and so, which is in every activity. It is
manifested everywhere. Then how is it that we are not
able to perceive It, or feel It, or intellectually comprehend
It? --- "BECAUSE OF ITS INCOMPREHENSIBLE
SUBTLETY."
The grosser the thing, the more perceptible it is. Earth can
be smelt, can be tasted, can be seen, can be heard. Water
cannot be smelt. Fire cannot be tasted. Air cannot be seen.
Space has only sound as its property.
Cause is always subtler than effect. Space itself being a
gross product, it must have a cause. That which is the
cause for Akasha is the Eternal Substratum, from which all
the Elements have arisen. Consciousness being thus the
"subtlest of the subtle," pervading even Akasha, It is
944
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
incomprehensible to the gross equipments of thought,
feeling and perception.
IT IS FAR AND NEAR --- Limited and conditioned things
can be defined by their location in space as "here" or
"there." And with reference to their distance from the
observer, we can say they are near or far. But that which is
All-pervading must be at once "here" and "there." And
therefore, it is NEAR AND FAR. This phrase also has been
sometimes interpreted as "FAR AND YET NEAR." "FAR":
in its Transcendental Absolute nature the Truth is FAR
AWAY from all the hallucinations of names and forms,
which, in their aggregate, constitute the Universe, but at
the same time as Existence, Truth exists in every name and
form: "NEAR."
In short, this verse, in its staggering beauty arising out of
its deliberate language of contradiction, shakes the reader
from his intellectual complacency and whips him up to
reflect and to realise that the Absolute Reality is at once
transcendent and immanent.
THIS BRAHMAN, WHICH CAN BE REALISED WITHIN
OURSELVES AS SELF, IS ONE AND THE SAME IN ALL,
AND REVELS AS THE SELF IN ALL. THIS IS
EXPLAINED BELOW:
945
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
17. And undivided, yet He exists as if divided in beings; That is
to be known as the Supporter of Beings; He devours and He
generates.
UNDIVIDED, AND YET, IN BEINGS, IT EXISTS AS IF
DIVIDED --- Electricity is All-pervading, and yet,
conditioned by the bulb it manifests as effulgence at the
filament. So too, though the Paramatman is All-pervading,
It individualises itself as special manifestations only at
points where equipments are available. Though space is
one, it can manifest as room-space, pot-space etc., only
when seemingly conditioned by the four walls of the
room, or the pot.
IT IS THE SUPPORTER OF ALL, DEVOURING AS WELL
AS GENERATING THEM --- The post is the supporter of
the ghost. It "creates" the ghost vision and "devours" it.
The earth is the supporter of all plants. It creates and it
devours them all. The ocean is the supporter of all waves,
waves are born from the ocean, and they are devoured by
the same ocean. Similarly, Truth is that solid Omnipotent
Substratum upon which is projected the world-of-
plurality by the deluded mind and intellect; and when the
mind and intellect are transcended, the vision of samsara
gets devoured in the very experience of the Tranquil, just
as, on waking, the dream merges into the essence of the
waker's mind.
IT IS TO BE KNOWN --- The theme of all the discussions
in the previous stanzas (Stanza 13 onwards) was "THAT
946
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHICH IS THE KNOWABLE." This is to be "known" by a
mind that has been prepared for it through the disciplines
advocated in the earlier section.
IF THERE BE THUS AN ALL-PERVADING TRUTH,
EVER PRESENT IN US, AND IF WE CANNOT
PERCEIVE OR EXPERIENCE THIS SELF, IT MUST BE
SURELY A PRINCIPLE OF DARKNESS. THIS IS NOT SO.
LISTEN:
18. That (BRAHMAN) , the Light-of-all lights, is said to be
beyond darkness; (It is) Knowledge, the Object-of-Knowledge,
seated in the hearts of all, to be reached by Knowledge.
Brahman, the illuminator in all, is the One Consciousness
by which everything is known intellectually, realised
intuitively, and experienced spiritually. Since the
Consciousness in us brings our various experiences within
our understanding and knowledge, it is generally
compared with light. To see an object, it is not only
sufficient that the object is in line with a healthy pair of
eyes, but the object must also be bathed in light. Taking
this experience in the outer world of cognition as an
illustrative analogy, within us too we must have some
"Light" to illumine, since we can see and have the
knowledge of the different types of emotions and
thoughts that arise and exist in our bosom. This Light-of-
Wisdom, by which we become aware of our own mental
947
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and intellectual conditions at any given moment, is called
the "Light" of the Soul, or the Self, the Consciousness.
By the "Light" of Consciousness, every thought is
brilliantly lit in the awareness of our life. Thus, it has
become a spiritual tradition to call Consciousness as
"Light."
The moment the student comes across such an expression,
he is apt to misunderstand it as the LIGHT he has
experienced in the world. The brilliance of the light
experienced in the outer-world belongs to the realm-of-
objects, and it cannot be the subject that is conscious of it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the teacher should indicate,
in some way, what exactly is meant by such familiar terms
as "the Illumination of the Soul," "the Effulgence of the
Self," "the Incandescence of the Consciousness."
LIGHT-OF-ALL-LIGHTS --- To indicate the Subject, we
have to negate the entire field-of-objects. Sources of light
such as the Sun, moon, stars, lightning or even fire, are
described as having no illumination at all in the blinding
luminosity of the Self. Therefore, Krishna indicates that
the Self, in each, is the "Light" which illumines all other
perceptible lights! Even the Sun, though it has light of its
own, is immaterial to the living world of beings, if the
Consciousness in them does not illumine it. If I am not
aware, but I am told by some wise-looking sage, that I
have a pair of horns, it does not matter to me, because
they are not available for my enjoyment, nor are they
948
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
useful in my life, as long as I am not aware of them. My
world can give me my quota of cherished joys and pains
only when I am conscious of it. Light, as a principle
manifested, can serve my world only when it comes into
my awareness. Thus, all sources of light are illumined by
my Consciousness. Therefore, the Self is indicated as the
Subject that experiences the entire world of objectified
light.
THAT IS SAID TO BE BEYOND DARKNESS --- Even
after the indication that the Self is Consciousness that
illumines all other Lights of the world, the impression of
Light, as an object of our experience is so powerful in our
finite intellect that the average student can still retain only
his "relative concept" of light. In the world outside, light,
in its empirical sense, is that which we comprehend as a
contrast to darkness. If there were no light, there would
have been no days; in the Sun there is no meaning for the
word light, since the Sun knows no darkness! Thus, to
indicate the Absolute nature of the Infinite "Light" of the
Soul, it is stated that it is beyond the concept of darkness;
it is Absolute Light, the Consciousness.
Even to say that THERE IS darkness, we must be
conscious of it. The "Light" of awareness is so subtle and
Absolute, that It illumines not only the various sources of
light in the world, but also the experience of darkness
itself! That which illumines both light and darkness must
be a factor that transcends both these experiences. Thus,
949
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Spirit is indicated as that which transcends even
darkness.
The second line indicates that the Spirit is (a) Knowledge
(Jnanam), (b) that which is to be known (Jneyam), and (c)
that which is to be reached by knowledge (Jnana-gamyam).
In short, this is the final experience that is to be gained for
which we have prepared ourselves through moral
perfections such as "humility," etc., (XIII-5 to 11) and have
tried to concentrate upon the "Knowledge" (XIII-12 to 17).
This is the point-of-concentration for the head and the
heart that have been already disciplined for the final flight
in meditation. The Consciousness that transcends our
experiences and illumines our life is the very goal in all
spiritual endeavours, at all times, and everywhere.
DWELLING IN THE HEART OF ALL --- If there is an
Infinite Light of Knowledge to be known --- without
which life is impossible, in the presence of which alone all
experiences can have a meaning and existence --- then this
Infinite Goal is certainly to be acquired and possessed.
Where am I to seek it? What pilgrimage must I undertake?
Am I capable of making an expedition? Probably, I am not
in possession of it today as it must be something to be
experienced yonder in some unknown time and place. To
negate all such misconceptions, it is boldly declared here
that this Infinite dwells in the hearts of all.
Philosophically, "heart" means the area in the mental zone
from where noble and pious thoughts spring forth. In an
950
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
atmosphere of goodness, when the intellect steadily
contemplates upon the "Light" that lies beyond darkness --
- the Absolute Non-dual Self that exists, transcending all --
- but also immanent in its subtle all-pervading nature --- It
can be contacted and realised, and therefore, the "heart" is
considered as the dwelling place of the Self.
The Consciousness functioning in the seekers' mind and
intellect, if lived and experienced by Itself, must give the
experience of the Infinite, just as by knowing the
composition of a minute particle of salt, the world of
sodium-chloride is understood.
SEEK THE "LIGHT" THROUGH DEVOTION: HERE
FOLLOWS A CONCLUDING REMARK FOR THE
THEME DISCUSSED SO FAR:
19. Thus the Field, as well as the knowledge and the knowable
have been briefly stated. Knowing this, My devotee enters into
My Being.
What has been described in this chapter so far is the whole
doctrine, the doctrine of the Vedas, taught in brief as the
doctrine of the Geeta. The FIELD described above (XIII-6
& 7) beginning with the 'Great Elements' and ending with
'Fortitude'; KNOWLEDGE comprising the moral and
ethical rules ordering our right relationship with the
world, (XIII-8 to 12), starting with 'humility' and ending
with 'the perception of the end of knowledge' and the
951
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
KNOWABLE described just now, (XIII-2 & 7), these have
been briefly dealt with.
Now the question is: Who among the seekers is really fit
for this great "Knowledge"? It is prescribed by the Lord
that His "DEVOTEES ALONE ARE FIT FOR MY STATE."
Devotion here is not merely an emotional surrender in
love unto the Lord, but an intellectual apprehension of the
Truth, through a correct discrimination between the 'Field'
and the 'Knower-of-the-Field.' One who is able to
recognise the one Vaasudeva, who is the vitalising
Conscious-Principle in all Fields-of-matter-envelopments
(VII-5), is the true devotee "WHO IS FIT FOR MY STATE"
(Mat Bhava).
THE "FIELD" AND THE "KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD"
TOGETHER IN THEIR COMBINATION PROVIDE US
WITH ONE WORD FOR THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE...
20. Know you that Matter (PRAKRITI) and Spirit
(PURUSHA) are both beginningless; and know you also that all
modifications and qualities are born of PRAKRITI.
Earlier Krishna had described the World-of-Matter
(Prakriti) as falling under two groups, the Higher and the
Lower. Both these are explained in this chapter as the
KNOWER and the FIELD. During the discussion of the
Higher and the Lower Prakritis, it was said that they
together constitute the source of Creation. Continuing the
952
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
same thought in this chapter, in a fresh phraseology as the
"Field" and its "Knower," it is repeated that they together
constitute the womb-of-all-beings.
Matter (Prakriti) and Spirit (Purusha) are both
beginningless. Matter and Spirit are the two aspects of
Ishwara, the Lord. As the Lord is Eternal, it is but natural
that His nature --- Matter and Spirit --- should also be
Eternal, meaning beginningless. It is these two, in their
inter-play, that project Creation, continue to preserve it,
and dissolve the Universe created by them. Thus, the play
of Matter and Spirit is the cause of samsara and the
Substratum for both of them is the Lord, the Light of
lights.
Subjectively, when the creative power in me, ordered by
my vasanas (avidya), comes to play in the field of its
expression, dynamised by its "Knower," it projects a world
of experience, which I maintain and destroy according to
the nature, the condition and qualities governing the
Matter-Spirit factors in me.
All forms and qualities are born of Matter. All forms and
emanations (vikaras) which have been explained (XIII-6
and 7) already and all qualities (gunas) such as those
which express themselves as pleasure, pain, delusion and
such other mental states, spring from Matter (Prakriti). In
short, 'Matter' is that out of which all forms and qualities
come into existence. All changes and modifications belong
to the realm of 'Matter' and the Atman is the Changeless
953
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Substratum (Kutasthah), in the presence of which, all these
changes take place.
WHAT THEN ARE THESE FORMS AND QUALITIES
WHICH ARE DESCRIBED HERE AS BORN OF
PRAKRITI?
21. In the production of the effect and the cause, PRAKRITI is
said to be the cause; in the experience of pleasure and pain,
PURUSHA is said to be the cause.
IN THE PRODUCTION OF CAUSE AND EFFECT --- The
'effects' mentioned here are thirteen in number and are
constituted of the five great elements, the five senses,
mind, intellect and ahamkara. The macrocosmic gross
elements in their gunas are themselves represented in the
microcosm as the five indriyas. We had discussed this in
the description of the Cosmic-Form of the Lord (Chapter
XI). These sense organs cannot bring their stimuli of the
outer world to the individual personality unless there is
the converging point of all the indriyas, called the mind.
In order to respond properly to the stimuli, there must be
a coordinating and understanding, discriminating and
reasoning principle that governs the mind; and that
principle is the intellect. In the world-of-objects,
constituted of the elements, in the realm of the mind and
in the responses sent out by the intellect, there must be a
constant sense of I-ness, born out of the individual's
954
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
identification with all that is mentioned above. This is
called the 'Ego.' All these thirteen items, together in their
aggregate, represent the 'effect' (karya), mentioned in the
stanza.
PRAKRITI IS SAID TO BE THE CAUSE --- All the above-
mentioned together constitute the world-of-matter. The
five elements in their combination become the entire
world-of-objects including the body, the senses, sensation
and the instrument-of-judgement. From the five Great
Elements down to the Ego, all items enumerated together
form the "world-of-objects" --- since all of them can be
perceived.
AS EXPERIENCING PLEASURE AND PAIN --- That
which perceives the entire world-of-objects and their
reactions upon the ego which is the individual's direct
reaction to the world, is the Self. The Light of
Consciousness is that which illumines the world-of-objects
outside and the instruments of perception, feeling and
thought within.
PURUSHA IS SAID TO BE THE CAUSE --- Pleasure and
pain are the reactions in our intellect. When desirable
objects in a conducive pattern reach our life, the
experience is called 'pleasure.' And the opposite sensation,
produced by undesirable objects, is called 'pain.' Every
experience, in its final analysis, is adjudged either as pain
or as pleasure. The Awareness in us illumines these. It
would be impossible to be conscious of the flow of
955
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
experiences without the Grace of the Consciousness.
Therefore, the Spirit (Purusha) is explained here as the
cause for the experiences in life. In short, Purusha is the
cause for samsara. The Spirit, functioning in a field as the
"Knower" of it, suffers the sorrows of samsara. He who
stands in the Sun suffers the heat; if he retires into the
shade, he enjoys its coolness.
THUS, IT IS SAID IN THE ABOVE THAT THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD" (PURUSHA) IS THE
ENJOYER OF THE PLEASURE AND PAIN --- SAMSARA.
WHAT IS THIS SAMSARA DUE TO? --- THE LORD
SAYS:
22. The PURUSHA, seated in PRAKRITI, experiences the
qualities born of PRAKRITI; attachment to the qualities is the
cause of his birth in good and evil wombs.
PURUSHA RESTS SEATED IN PRAKRITI --- The Purusha
(Spirit) has no samsara. But the "Knower of-the-Field,"
Purusha, when It identifies Itself with the "Field" (Prakriti),
becomes the experiencer. He identifies with the body and
the senses which are the effects of Prakriti.
HE EXPERIENCES THE QUALITIES BORN OF
PRAKRITI --- The sensations arising out of the matter-
envelopments (Prakriti) such as pleasure and pain, heat
and cold, success and failure etc., constitute the painful
shackles on the "Knower-of-the-Field." The destinies of
956
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Matter become the tragic experiences of the Spirit, not
because they are in the Spirit, but because the Spirit
unnecessarily makes an unhealthy contact, through its
own identification, with the realm of sorrow.
He not only experiences the joys and sorrows in life but
also develops a blind attachment to them and this is "THE
CAUSE FOR ITS BIRTH IN GOOD OR EVIL WOMBS."
"As its desire, so is its will" is a scriptural declaration of an
eternal truth. While living in the world, the "Knower-of-
the-Field" experiences the pleasures and joys interpreted
by the world-of-Matter and gets attached to them, and
thereby develops residual impressions (vasanas), and takes
to conductive fields where it can eke out its cherished
satisfaction through vivid experiences.
When the Spirit, eternally joyous and infinitely all-full,
orders a "Field" and identifies Itself with it, It becomes the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha). The Spirit, as Purusha,
suffers its own delusory samsara, because, having entered
the field in its pre-occupation with the world-of-objects,
and in its clinging attachment to the "Field," it looks, as
though it has forgotten its own nature divine. Thus,
'ignorance'(avidya), and attachment to the "Field," are the
two causes because of which the Satchidananda seems to
have become the miserable, bemoaning, tearful, samsarin.
The re-discovery of the Self and the awakening to our
spiritual nature would, therefore, be through the path of
(a) detachment from the "Field" and (b) experience of the
957
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Real-Knowledge; vairagya and viveka are the means for
regaining the God in ourselves.
THE LORD CONTINUES TO TEACH US DIRECTLY
WHAT THAT "SAVING KNOWLEDGE" IS:
23. The supreme PURUSHA in this body is also called the
Spectator, the Permitter, the Supporter, the Enjoyer, the great
Lord and the Supreme Self.
As a contrast to this deluded sorrowful "Knower-of-the-
Field," Purusha, there is the Pure Spirit uncontaminated by
the "Field." The moon in the bucket is the reflected moon
and for every reflection that dances with the conditionings
of the reflecting surface, there must be a real object. The
reflection is always conditioned by the reflecting medium
while the object reflected is never contaminated by the
changes in the reflecting surface. It is completely
independent of all conditions.
The "Knower-of-the-Field" is "Knowledge" or Conscious-
ness conditioned by the "Field." Naturally, therefore, there
must be a Knowledge, in fact totally unconditioned, which
appears conditioned, when it plays in the realm of its
conditionings.
Thus, in this stanza, Krishna mentions for the purpose of
his scientific analysis and investigation, two Purushas; the
LOWER, which has already been described and indicated
958
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
as the "Knower-of-the-Field," and the HIGHER, which is
the Pure Consciousness unconditioned by Prakriti. Both of
them function "in this body."
This Supreme Self is indicated in tems of what it looks like
in Its silent manifestations when the matter equipments
(Prakriti) are weaving their different patterns. When an
individual is completely deluded and totally unconscious
of the Self, in and through him the Infinite Divine
expresses Himself as though He is only an "onlooker"
(Upadrashtaa); that is to say when a person murders an
innocent victim, the Infinite All-powerful Lord expresses
through that criminal's vehicle only as a silent spectator of
it all (Upadrashtaa). When proper actions are undertaken,
the mind is in a quiet mood. When the individual actor is
not totally forgetful of the Self, in such a being, the
Supreme expresses Himself as a "Permitter" (Anumantaa).
When proper actions are done with full consciousness of
the Self and in a spirit of total surrender to the Lord, the
Lord is the "fulfiller" (Bhartaa). Such actions are filled with
success by His grace. He aids, as it were, the fulfilment of
all such activities.
When, with entire dedication unto Him the individual is
completely a Yoga-Yuktah, in his Eternal Conscious nature
(Nitya Chaitanya Swaroopa), It seems to be the very "enjoyer"
(Bhoktaa). The stanza concludes by saying that the great
Ishwara, the Lord of Lords (Maheshwara) is the Higher Self
in this very same body.
959
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HOW DOES THE ONE WHO KNOWS THE HIGHER
SELF, UNCONDITIONED BY THE "FIELD," REACT IN
LIFE?
24. He who thus knows the PURUSHA and PRAKRITI
together with the qualities, in whatsoever condition he may be,
he is not born again.
In the previous stanza, it was said that the identification of
the Purusha with the "Field" is the cause for Its
participation in the tragic destinies of matter. If there were
no contact, indeed, the Purusha would have been a mere
observer of the world-of-matter without undergoing any
suffering or sorrow. But the Infinite plays the part of the
miserable mortal because of Its delusory imagination that
It is directly conditioned by the mental and intellectual
reactions.
These vivid experiences in the world outside leave
impressions, to fulfill which the Purusha is born again and
again either in the higher wombs of enjoyment or to suffer
among the lower manifestations.
But he who has realised in himself: (a) that which is the
Matter; (b) that which is the Spirit; (c) how the Spirit,
deluded by its own preoccupations, gets identified with
Matter and behaves as "Knower-of-the-Field" and also (d)
the mysteries of the gunas, under the influences of which,
960
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the equipments function --- he becomes a Man-of-
Wisdom.
To know a thing we must stand apart from it, whereas, if
we are ourselves involved in any situation, we cannot
understand it fully. To realise at once the world-of-objects,
the instruments of contact and their behaviour and
qualities, is to stand apart from them all --- and in that
state, the Spirit, the Substratum, is realised. Thus, to
recognise our own nature to be the absolute, infinite, Pure
Consciousness, is to end all misconceptions (avidya). To
one who has thus ended all avidya, there is no more any
reason to get completely identified thereafter with the
"Field-of-Matter." Therefore, it is said, such an individual
thereafter: "WHATEVER BE HIS CONDUCT, HE IS NOT
BORN AGAIN" --- that is to say, no new vasanas can be
created in him and the old vasanas functioning in the mind
and intellect have dropped away from him, since, in him
there is no more any false ego-centric contact with the
world outside.
It is the Jiva that creates more and more vasanas in the
mind, and through the mind, according to the vasanas, it
projects different equipments and different worlds of
experiences in order to eke out its desired quota of joy and
pain. That, in such an individual of Self-realisation no
vasanas are left over, that he will be in the embodiment
only so long as this body exists, that the Knower of
Brahman himself becomes the Infinite, and that all the
accumulated reactions of his actions perish at the moment
961
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of Self-realisation --- are all truths declared by the
Upanishads.
NOW THERE ARE SEVERAL 'PATHS' TO SELF
KNOWLEDGE AND THEY ARE MENTIONED HERE AS
FOLLOWS:
25. Some, by meditation, behold the Self in the Self by the Self;
others by the "YOGA -of-Knowledge" (by SANKHYA YOGA)
; and others by KARMA YOGA.
This realisation of the Self in its pure nature, undressed of
all its matter envelopments, is the final goal of spiritual
seeking and there are more 'paths' than one, prescribed for
this Divine Achievement. Integration of a human
personality must start from the point where an individual
finds himself to be at present. No education can be
successful unless the students are given graded lessons.
A totally disintegrated individual must also be given a
'path' which he can easily follow with his restless
equipment. Spiritual unfoldment cannot take place merely
because of an intellectual appreciation of the theory of
Perfection. Evolution actually takes place only when a
corresponding change in the very subjective life is
accomplished. Therefore, an active, intelligent and
enthusiastic participation of the seeker in controlling,
directing, and re-educating his thought-life is necessary ---
962
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
hence the difficulty in accomplishing inward spiritual
unfoldment in every individual.
The great spiritual scientists of the past, discovering ways
of evolving the entire mankind, consisting of different
types, evolved various "roads" --- all converging at the
same goal. Each 'path' is the fittest for the one who is
walking it. No 'path' can be said to be nobler than the
other. In a pharmacy there are different medicines; each
one serves a definite type of patient and the medicine
prescribed for a given disease is the fittest medicine for
that patient as long as his ailment continues.
The difference between the various seekers is the
difference in their mental equanimity and intellectual
equipoise. The lesser 'paths' are mainly meant for
purifying the inner equipments, and when the mind
becomes steady and concentrated, when the intellect is
redeemed from its wasteful habits of wrong imaginations,
then the equipments are ready for Higher flights through
the "Path-of-Meditation."
BY MEDITATION SOME BEHOLD THE SELF ---
MEDITATION CONSISTS IN "WITHDRAWING, BY
CONCENTRATION, ALL THE SENSE ORGANS AWAY
FROM THEIR RESPECTIVE SENSE-OBJECTS INTO THE
MIND, AND THEN WITHDRAWING THE MIND INTO
THE INNER INTELLIGENCE, AND THEN
CONTEMPLATING UPON THE HIGHEST." It is a
continuous and unbroken thought-flow, like a stream of
963
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
flowing oil. In order to pursue this path, naturally, the
individual must have a dynamic head and heart --- both
least disturbed by their own subjective defects.
To "behold" does not mean to see the Self as an object,
which would then mean something against the very
assertion of the scriptures. The Self is the "SUBJECT";
therefore, the term "behold" is used to mean only 'an
inward experience of a total subjective re-discovery.' The
experience is so vivid that it is comparable to our
unshakable knowledge of anything after we have once
objectively SEEN it ourselves.
BY THE SELF IN THE SELF --- The subjective experience
of the very core of our personality is accomplished by the
head in the pure heart. Shankara explains the portion: "By
meditation, the Yogins behold the Self, the Pure
consciousness, in the Self (Buddhi), by the Self --- by their
own intelligence, that is, by the Antahkarana, refined by
Dhyana." All sincere attempts at meditation with steady
mind-and-intellect, and the steady mental-pool of
thought, with its passions and vasanas subsided, and to an
extent, even eliminated, provides a clear reflected surface
in which the glory of the Self is seen reflected, and this is
recognised intuitively.
One may wonder why the same term is used to indicate
the instrument of recognition (Atmani), the subject
recognising it (Atmana) and object recognised (Atmanam).
The reason is, in the final realisation, it is experienced that
964
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the intellect, the mind, the seeker and the sought are all in
fact nothing other than the One Self. The waves, the
ripples, the foam are all nothing but the ocean. The
dreamer, the dreamt, and the dream are all nothing but
the waker's own mind. In this sense, in our scriptural lore,
we often find the term "Atman" used to indicate even our
outer-personalities brought about by our identifications
with the matter-envelopments in us.
This 'path' of quietening the mind, steadying the intellect
and with an integrated mind-and-intellect, contemplating
steadily upon the transcendental Self, is not a 'path' that is
available to all, as it calls forth certain mental and
intellectual perfections which are not commonly seen in
everyone. Those who have these qualifications are
considered as the highest type of aspirants. The seekers of
the best type --- who have developed in themselves a
sufficient detachment (vairagya) from the sense objects,
and a ready discrimination (viveka) to distinguish the
permanent from the impermanent --- alone can steadily
walk this Highest 'path'.
OTHERS BY THE 'PATH' OF SANKHYA YOGA --- In the
case of those who have not the required amount of
steadiness in mind and intellect --- not because of any lack
of aspiration but for want of right understanding of the
Goal (viveka) --- their sense of detachment (vairagya) waxes
and wanes. Naturally, sometimes they are good at
meditation, and at other times, they experience a
tremendous amount of restlessness and agitation. For such
965
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seekers, the only remedy is a more intelligent and
enthusiastic study of the Shastras. The term 'Sankhya'
means "the sequence of logical thought through which we
reach a definite philosophical conclusion, unassailable by
any doubts any more.
This deep study and reflection (vichara), since it provides
the seeker with a better understanding of the text, and
therefore, a deeper conviction of the goal, will discover for
him a very healthy and steady self-application and a
divine equipoise in his meditation. Since vichara can safely
take us to the Yoga-of-Meditation, and help us to establish
ourselves therein, the very study of the Shastra and
reflections upon it (Sankhya) is here called as 'Yoga.' That
which ultimately takes one to Yoga is called Yoga, just as a
vehicle is often named by the destination to which it is
proceeding. "9. 30 is Delhi departure time" does not mean
that at that time the capital-city is packing off from our
country and going to the Nicobar Islands! It only shows
that a train will be leaving for Delhi at that scheduled
time. The seekers, who are not fit for steadily following
the 'path' of deep meditation, are advised to steam
themselves up by the Sankhya Yoga: by the 'path' of deep
study and reflection.
OTHERS AGAIN BY KARMA YOGA --- There is still
another type of seekers for whom even study of the
Shastra and effective reflections upon it becomes almost
impossible because their inward personality is so much
poisoned by the existing hosts of sensuous vasanas. They
966
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are in a state of mental agitation in which no dynamic and
effective meditation is possible. The instrument is not fit
for it, and therefore, the selfless activity in a spirit of Yajna
is prescribed for them. When the "Path-of-Action" is
pursued for a time, as contemplated in the Geeta (III-30),
the existing vasanas exhaust themselves and more and
more quietude and tranquillity are experienced by the
seeker. A mind, thus steadied, is fit for delving into the
deeper significances of the mantras, and when the
conviction of the goal is intensified in the individual, as a
result of these reflections, his meditation gathers a
momentum and a dash which can take him to the Highest
Peaks.
In short, seekers with the noblest Sattwic qualities need
only practice meditation; seekers of a slight Sattwic
temperament with a large share of agitations, must
develop the "creative stillness" in themselves through the
"Path-of-Perfection"; those who are suffering from the
worst mental oscillations, created by the vasana-
disturbances, must through Karma Yoga, develop Sattwic
traits, nurture and nourish them through reflection, and
thus gain enough Sattwic dynamism and steady
meditation.
IN THAT CASE, WHAT 'PATH' IS PRESCRIBED FOR
THOSE WHO ARE COMPLETELY STEEPED IN
"TAMAS" --- MENTAL AND INTELLECTUAL INERTIA?
THEY TOO ARE SERVED. LISTEN:
967
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
26. Others also, not knowing this, worship, having heard of it
from others; they too, cross beyond death, if they would regard
what they have heard as their Supreme Refuge.
The previous verse defines the 'path' that is conducive to
the best type of students (uttama adhikarins), and to the
mediocres and weaklings (madhyama adhikarins). To the
low class of aspirants too, the Geeta Acharya prescribes a
'path'.
HAVING HEARD FROM OTHERS --- There are some
who are not capable of meditation. They have neither the
intellectual capacity to follow the logical thoughts in any
philosophy, nor the necessary inward equipoise to follow
the "Path-of-Action." Even such people can evolve, though
they are ignorant of the 'paths,' if only they worship the
Principle of Truth on the strength of what they have heard
from others.
THEY TOO GO BEYOND DEATH --- If such people are
capable of constantly worshipping the Lord as they have
been instructed by other devotees, they too can transcend
the finite life of plurality and experience the Changeless.
The term 'DEATH'here, should not be understood as
meaning only the phenomenon of death that happens to a
personality expressed in a body. The term is used in its all-
embracing significance, indicating in its expanse of
meaning, the total principle-of-change as experienced by
any given human mind-and-intellect. As long as we
968
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
identify with the body --- gross, subtle or causal --- the
experiences can only be of the finite. To experience the
Infinite, is to enter the status of Immortality, beyond the
thraldom of death.
This verse, while explaining the efficacy of prayer and
worship, even when unscientifically performed, is not
recommending that all the methods are equally efficient,
but it is only emphasizing the idea that, in the practice of
worship, correct knowledge shall surely provide a better
guarantee of success. If seekers can progress upon the
authority of others' instructions, when they are themselves
ignorant, Sankara exclaims: "How much more so then can
they progress, who can independently appreciate the
Shastra texts and discriminate?"
THROUGH THESE VARIOUS 'PATHS' AVAILABLE,
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE ULTIMATE GOAL TO BE
REALISED? LISTEN:
27. Wherever any being is born, the unmoving or the moving,
know you, O best of the Bharatas, that it is from the union
between the "Field" and the "Knower-of-the-Field. "
All things in the world that are born --- both the world of
inert matter (unmoving) and the world of conscious
beings (moving) --- arise neither from the "Field" (Prakriti)
nor from the "Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha). The source
is from the marriage of Prakriti and Purusha. This
969
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
combination of Matter and Spirit is not an accomplished
union but is only a mutual super-imposition.
In every super-imposition, a delusion is recognised upon a
substratum: the ghost in the post. Not only the form and
all attributes of the ghost come to be projected upon the
post, but the post also lends its existence to the non-
existent ghost. As a result of their mutual exchange, we
find that the non-existent ghost comes to exist in our
experience, while the existing post becomes a non-existent
ghost with illusions of physical limbs and ghastly
behaviour. This process, which is a trick of the human
mind, is called mutual super-imposition. In the Pure
Consciousness there is no Field-of-Matter. The Field-of-
Matter has neither existence, nor sentiency. But the spirit
plays in the "Field" (Prakriti), and becomes the "Knower-
of-the-Field" (Purusha), and when this Purusha works in
Prakriti the combination breeds the entire phenomenal
Universe constituted of the moving and the unmoving.
When, through careful discrimination, we successfully
discover this play in ourselves, the vision of plurality
recedes and we understand that the ultimate Truth is the
substratum on which both Prakriti and Purusha play.
Ordinarily, I am a quiet man. But sometimes my heart's
passion is endless. When I identify myself with the
passion in my heart, I play in the world as the passionate
man and perform deeds for which I myself might later on
regret! Now in this example, the regret, and the regretting
970
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
person, the passion and passionate entity --- all of them
revel in me. They all belong to me but I am not they! Yet,
when I identify myself with them, I become the
perpetrator of the regrettable actions and the passionate
actor in me comes to brood over what has happened, and
so it suffers. Similarly, the Self contains matter possibilities
--- the Self being Paripoorna. To project matter and to
identify with it, is to become the Purusha, and the Purusha,
maintaining Itself in the Field-of-Matter so projected,
becomes the source of the entire samsara. To analyse
closely with discrimination, to detach courageously with
vitality, to carefully and heroically live as an observer of
all that is happening within, not allowing ourselves to be
misled by our own imaginations --- is the method of
realising the Perfection in ourselves.
THIS SELF, WHICH IS THE SUBSTRATUM OF A GIVEN
'PURUSHA' AND 'PRAKRITI,' IS ITSELF THE ONE SELF
EVERYWHERE AS INDICATED BELOW:
28. He sees, who sees the Supreme Lord existing equally in all
beings, the unperishing within the perishing.
HE SEES, WHO SEES THE SUPREME LORD --- The
Supreme Lord (Parameshwara), on whom the "Field" and
the "Knower-of-the-Field" play the game of delusory
identification and consequently suffer the endless sorrows
of samsara, is the Eternal Principle of Pure Existence. The
one factor that binds all the waves of the ocean together,
971
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that EXISTS in all waves and SUPPORTS the entire self-
destroying and mutually procreating play of the waves, is
the ocean. Similarly, the Substratum that supports all is
the Supreme Lord "remaining the same in all beings."
THE UNDYING IN THE DYING --- To a superficial
observer, the world is a field of perpetual change, a
constant death. Nothing remains the same even for a
moment. Things change themselves and naturally, their
relationships with each other also change. This welter of
change is what we observe in the world of perceptions, in
the realm of feelings and in the field of thoughts. In terms
of this world-of-plurality, and its ever-changing nature,
the Absolute Truth is indicated as the Changeless
Platform upon which these changes are staged.
Everything in the phenomenal world is subject to
modifications such as birth, growth, disease, decay and
death. The entire chain of modifications starts with birth;
that which is born alone can grow, and ultimately passing
through the various changes, reach the final change in
"death." When the Supreme Lord is indicated here as the
"Deathless," all other modifications are also denied in
Him. This Changeless Consciousness, that supports all
changes, is the undying Principle that illumines the ever-
dying world-of-plurality. The gold in the ornaments is the
only constant factor; out of the same bar of gold various
types of ornaments are made and destroyed to make other
types of ornaments. The shape and the size of the
972
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ornaments change, but the changeless factor in them all, is
pure gold.
He who is capable of recognising the Supreme Lord
(Parameshwara), who revels everywhere as the Pure Spirit,
in all names and forms, who changes not, while the outer
equipments change; he alone is the one who sees what is
really to be seen. In this stanza, the term 'seeing' is a
phrase borrowed from our ordinary world-of-perception,
but used in the sense of "spiritual Self-realisation."
The physical world is recognised and perceived through
our physical equipments. Emotions in the world around
us are felt and recognised by our minds. The world of
ideas is comprehended by our intellect. The Spiritual
Substratum in the Universe of beings and things can be
apprehended only from the spiritual centre in ourselves.
Just as the EYES cannot see THOUGHTS, so too the
equipments of perceptions, feelings and thoughts cannot
recognise the Spirit that is subtler than them, and It lies
transcending all of them.
HE ALONE SEES WHO SEES THIS --- This is a very
powerful and direct assertion. Everybody sees, but not the
Real. Wrong perceptions indicate mal-adjustments in the
instruments-of-perception. Hallucinations and illusions,
false imaginations and delusory projections of the mind
veil the reality of the thing observed. Therefore, here the
Yogeshwara asserts that he who recognises this harmony of
the one Truth, this thread of Reality, which holds all
973
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
experiences together, which is one in all beings,
experiences the Truth to be realised in the world. Others
see, and yet do not see; he alone sees who realises this
Supreme Lord, which is the Imperishable.
TO EULOGISE THE RIGHT KNOWLEDGE BY
INDICATING THE RESULT OF ITS POSSESSION, THE
LORD CONTINUES:
29. Indeed, he who sees the same Lord everywhere equally
dwelling, destroys not the Self by the Self; therefore, he goes to
the Highest Goal.
Vedanta preaches not so much the negation of the world,
as the re-evaluation of things, beings and happenings
constituting the world. Generally we perceive our own pet
ideas and emotions, coloured by our unsteady
understanding and changing emotions. To see the world,
not through these equipments, but with the clear eye of
wisdom, is to recognise perfection and bliss, divinity and
sanctity in the very drab and dreary world of today,
amidst its very sorrows and ugliness. Erroneous
perception of the Reality, through maladjusted
equipments, is the perception of the world, which, in its
turn is throttling the individual perceiving it.
When the Pure Consciousness looks upon Itself through
the refracting medium of matter envelopments, It
perceives, as it were, a world-of-plurality, and the
974
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
pluralistic world grins and dances, whistles, shrieks and
howls --- ever ugly, stinking and sweating --- according to
the maddening changes that take place in the very
equipments (FIELD) through which the ego (KNOWER-
OF-THE-FIELD) happens to gaze. To re-discover the
spiritual Reality, the Supreme Lord, in and through this
horrid welter of change and sorrow is to end all our
agitations and unprofitable aims and exertions, "FOR HE
SEES THE LORD DWELLING IN EVERY PLACE ALIKE."
Such an individual, in his own experienced wisdom, no
more suffers from sorrow or fear. When the post is
realised, the dread created by the ghost is ended.
HE DESTROYS NOT THE SELF BY THE SELF --- Earlier
the Lord has explained when exactly the self becomes the
enemy of the Self (VI-5 & 6). Whenever the lower ego-
centric individuality is not available for sure guidance by
the Higher-Principle-of-Wisdom in ourselves, the lower
becomes our enemy. When a vehicle is no more under our
control, it will cease to be of any service to us and
becomes, as it were, an engine of destruction. Similarly,
when the lower in us is not available for the guidance of
the Higher, the former turns out to be an enemy of the
latter. And in an individual who recognises and
experiences the one Parameshwara that revels everywhere,
the lower cannot fight against or shadow any longer the
glory of the Higher.
THEREFORE HE GOES TO THE HIGHEST GOAL --- The
true nature of the Self remains undiscovered due to the
975
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
non-apprehension of Reality (ajnana), or due to the mis-
apprehension (mithya jnana) arising out of the non-
apprehension. The non-apprehension of the one
Parameshwara everywhere, makes an individual act in the
world in a way which renders him incapable of
appreciating the glory of the Self in all other living beings.
Thus, he becomes a source of sorrow to the community of
living beings around him. The non-apprehension (ajnana)
creates a veil because of which, not only do we not
recognise the one Eternal Divine everywhere, but we also
identify ourselves with the body and the mind, and
behave as though they alone are real; in consequence,
sensuality, materialistic pursuits, and selfish satisfactions
become the only worthwhile objects or pursuits in our life,
which we destroy for ourselves and others. The state an
individual gains when both these, non-apprehension
(ajnana) and mis-apprehension (mithya-jnana) are ended, is
that Absolute experience, the experience of the Highest
Goal, and therefore, "HE GOES TO THE HIGHEST."
INDIVIDUALS ACT DIFFERENTLY, AND THEREFORE,
THE PARAMESHWARA, PLAYING BEHIND EACH
INDIVIDUAL MUST BE A SEPARATE SELF. TO
CONTRADICT THIS CONCEPT OF PLURALITY IN THE
SELF, IT IS SAID:
30. He sees, who sees that all actions are performed by
PRAKRITI alone, and that the Self is actionless.
976
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
If a caravan of motor vehicles, manufactured by different
companies, with different horse-powers, at different
periods of history, is put on the road, the performance of
each vehicle will be unique. We cannot conclude
therefrom that the petrol in each vehicle is of different
typical potencies. The same electrical energy illumines
different electric bulbs, manifesting different intensities of
incandescence at different points. The electricity is one;
the petrol is one; and yet the performance of the cars and
the light manifested in the bulbs are different from
equipment to equipment because of the very quality of the
equipments. This analogy can explain the wonderful idea
expressed in this stanza.
PRAKRITI ALONE PERFORMS ALL ACTIONS --- Matter
is the equipment that orders the types of action that
should manifest. If the mind is bad, the life expressed
through it will also be bad. All actions are according to the
types of desires entertained by the intellect. Thus, in the
presence of Spirit, the "equipments" (Prakriti) function,
and the Self (Atman), functioning in the "Field," called the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha), acts in the world outside.
When the "Knower-of-the-Field" leaves the "Field," there is
no more any activity in the "Field," nor is there any
activity for the Self Itself.
THE SELF IS ACTIONLESS (NOT ACTING) --- The Self is
all-pervading, perfect and, as such, there is no desire in It.
And where desires have ended, actions are impossible. In
the Infinite, there is no action, and the very many reasons
977
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
as to why there is no action in the Self, will be described
presently (XIII-32).
He who is capable of recognising how his own vehicles
function and realising that the Self in him is ever
actionless, is alone the right perceiver, who is recognising
and experiencing the "IMPERISHABLE AMIDST THE
PERISHABLE." "HE SEES WHO SEES." The
manifestations of individuals are different from person to
person because of the differences in the composition and
make-up of the various equipments (upadhis), and, when
they are destroyed, all differences merge to express the
one Infinite experience, the Supreme Lord.
WHILE EXPLAINING THE SELF, AS THE SOURCE-OF-
ALL-BEINGS, THE LORD INDICATES THE STATE OF A
MAN WHO CAN DECLARE THAT HE HAS HAD FULL
EXPERIENCE OF THE INFINITE ONE:
31. When he (man) sees the whole variety-of-beings, as resting
in the One, and spreading forth from That (One) alone, he then
becomes BRAHMAN.
A scientific investigation is complete only when the
phenomenon intellectually analysed, is applied physically
and brought within the limits of our observation.
When one has understood that the atoms are the physical
units of matter, one must also realise at once that these
978
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
atoms in different combinations of numbers and patterns
create the world of infinite forms and qualities. Similarly,
to know that the Self is the Ultimate Truth behind the
names and forms, is, in itself, only a partial knowledge.
The complete understanding of Life can arise only when
we, at once, understand how from the Self the endless
multiplicity of names and forms rise up and spread to
become the Universe.
Just as in our understanding we can comprehend all the
waves as inherent in the ocean, so too, a man of right
understanding can recognise "THE SEPARATE
EXISTENCE OF ALL BEINGS IN THE ONE." Once
having understood the ocean, we do realise how the
numberless waves rise from that one ocean; so too a man
of right understanding also realises "THE EXPANSION
OF PLURALITY FROM THAT ONE ALONE." Such
moments of complete understanding, wherein the Man-of-
Wisdom experiences the One Self within and without ---
enveloping and embracing, penetrating and nourishing
not only the depthless and the measureless Infinite, but
also the superficial world of pluralistic names and forms --
- are the sacred moments when he has "BECOME
BRAHMAN."
The Self alone can recognise the Self. He who is
recognising the one homogeneous Self, he who is
experiencing that the Consciousness in him is one with the
homogeneous-mass-Consciousness everywhere, and he
who also understands how on his coming into the body
979
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
awareness, the world-of-plurality throws the mantle of its
magic upon the fair face of the Infinite and makes It look
ugly with all its perishable names and forms --- such a
person is of "True Wisdom" and "Right Perception." At
that moment, he has himself transcended his own
equipments and has come to identify himself with the
One-Consciousness-everywhere.
IF THE ONE SELF BE THE SELF IN ALL BODIES, THEN
IT MUST BE NECESSARILY ACTING AND EARNING
THE REACTIONS --- VASANAS. TO PROVE THE
FALLACY OF SUCH A CONCLUSION IT IS SAID:
32. Being without beginning, and being devoid of qualities, the
Supreme Self, the Imperishable, though dwelling in the body, O
Kaunteya, neither acts, nor is tainted.
Even though at Its touch It thrills the matter equipments
into various activities, the fact that the Spirit is actionless
is emphasised by the scriptures, and this is not an idea so
easy for early students of Vedanta to understand.
Therefore, the Upanishads have taken great pains to make
us understand that the All-full Infinite, being One-
without-a-second in its All-pervasiveness, has nothing to
accomplish for Itself. Earlier we have discussed in the
Geeta: "it is Nature that acts" (V-14). This Spirit,
identifying Itself with "Field" (Prakriti), becomes the
"Knower-of-the Field" (Purusha) and it is this
"individualised ego" that acts and accomplishes.
980
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here we are given some logical reasons why the Infinite
Consciousness, "THOUGH DWELLING IN THE BODY,
NEITHER ACTS, NOR IS TAINTED." When the local
Judge, Shri Gopal Rao, condemns a murderer to be
hanged, the Judge is not considered as having committed
a murder; the individuality in the Judge can gain no taint.
Shri Gopal Rao in the chair acts as the Sessions Judge and
it is the Judge who has passed the death sentence.
HAVING NO BEGINNING --- That which has a cause
alone has a beginning. "No beginning," means "no cause."
Truth being "that from which everything comes," it is the
Uncaused Cause for all that has been created. That which
owes its existence to a CAUSE becomes itself an EFFECT,
and every EFFECT is nothing other than its CAUSE
"which has undergone a change." All effects are thus
changeable and things that are subject to change must
necessarily perish.
HAVING NO QUALITY --- That which has no change
cannot have any quality since that which has qualities is a
substance and all substances are perishable. The
Imperishable Infinite, THE CAUSE for everything, Itself
caused by nothing, must, therefore, be without any
quality.
THIS SUPREME SELF, IMPERISHABLE --- The Uncaused
Cause for the entire world of phenomena, the Paramatman,
which is devoid of qualities must necessarily be, by its
own logic, "Imperishable." The process-of-change,
981
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
happening in the properties and to the qualities of a thing,
is the phenomenon of its decay. That which is Changeless
cannot perish. And that which has no quality cannot
change!
Therefore, the Beginningless, the Quality-less, the
Imperishable Supreme Self, though living in the physical
structure, and thrilling the inner matter-field around each
embodied creature into the play of life, does not, in Itself,
and by Itself, act.
This is one of the subtle concepts in Vedanta which lesser
intellects must find rather difficult to grasp. This is a well-
recognised difficult portion in the Vedantic literature. But a
little effort at reflection can clear the confusions and
remove all the difficulties
HERE THE LORD GIVES SOME PARALLEL EXAMPLES
TO ILLUSTRATE THE ACTION-LESS-NESS OF THE
SELF AND ALSO THE QUALITY-LESS-NESS OF THE
SPIRIT IN ESSENCE, IN SPITE OF THE DISCORDANT
AND DEVLISH ACTIVITIES OF MATTER AROUND IT:
33. As the all-pervading ether is not tainted, because of its
subtlety, so too the Self, seated everywhere in the body, is not
tainted.
AS THE ALL-PERVADING AKASHA (SPACE) IS NEVER
SOILED --- Space is an example we can take to indicate
982
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the relationship of Spirit with Matter. Akasha means "that
which gives accommodation to things." In short, it is the
concept of pure Space. It is the subtlest of all gross
elements, and since greater subtlety implies greater
pervasiveness, Space pervades everything that is grosser
than it. A subtler thing cannot be conditioned by a grosser
factor --- the stone walls do not a prison make, nor iron
bars a cage, for the thoughts of the captive, being subtler
than the stone walls and iron bars, can penetrate them, ---
Akasha is the subtlest of all.
Space, being subtle, it allows everything to remain in it,
yet, nothing that it contains can contaminate it. The
Supreme Self, which is the very cause for the Akasha itself,
and therefore, subtler than it, "IT PREVADES ALL:
NOTHING PREVADES IT"... It cannot be contaminated by
anything that exists or happens in the world-of-plurality.
Murders committed in the dream cannot soil the hands of
the weaker! The bloody garb of the ghost cannot leave its
marks on the post. The mirage waters cannot wet even a
grain of sand in the desert. These are examples of
hallucinations, or delusory super-impositions. The world
of plurality being nothing but mis-apprehensions of
Reality arising out of the non-apprehension of the Real,
the realm-of-matter (Prakriti) and its activities cannot
contaminate and soil the Perfect and the Eternal.
983
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE SELF, THOUGH IT PERMEATES AND PREVADES
THE WHOLE BODY, IS NOT SOILED, JUST AS SPACE
CANNOT BE DIRTIED BY ALL THE
AMOUNT OF FILTH THAT IT MAY ACCOMODATE IN
ITSELF. THEN WHAT EXACTLY IS THE SPIRIT'S
FUNCTION IN THE BODY? LISTEN:
34. Just as the one Sun illumines the whole world, so also the
Lord-of-the-Field (PARAMATMAN) illumines the whole
"Field, " O Bharata.
Here is one of the most striking examples in our scriptural
literature, given to us by the Divine Charioteer. It conveys
to our intellectual comprehension the exact relationship of
the Consciousness, the Eternal Principle-of-Life, with
reference to the various worlds-of-matter and their
expressions. Just as the one Sun illumines the entire
Universe from afar, and at all times, so too the
Consciousness merely illumines the world-of-objects, the
body, the mind, and the intellect.
Though generally in our everyday talks we attribute the
ACTIVITY of lighting up the world of the Sun, we find on
close examination that we cannot attribute any such
ACTIVITY to the Sun. An action is that which has a
beginning and an end and it is generally undertaken to
fulfil a deep desire, or a silent purpose. The Sun does not
illumine the world in this sense of the term. On the other
984
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
hand, "light" itself is the nature of the Sun, and in its
presence everything gets illumined. Similarly,
Consciousness is of the nature of awareness and in Its
presence, everything becomes known --- illumined.
In the world there is only one Sun and it illumines
everything, good and bad, the vicious and the virtuous,
the ugly and the beautiful. And yet the Sun is not sullied
by the ugly, the vicious and the bad, nor is it blessed by
the good, the virtuous or the beautiful. So too, in our inner
life, the Ever-perfect and Joyous Consciousness functions
through the equipments and illumines them, but It never
gets contaminated by the sins of the mind, by the
perversions of the intellect, or by the crimes of the
physical body. It only illumines. This illumination of the
Self, playing upon our thoughts and emotions, gets
splashed to form the ever changing patterns of the
multiple individuals, with their everchanging behaviours.
THIS DOCTRINE OF THE "FIELD" AND THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD," BOTH PLAYING IN THE
SUPREME, DISCUSSED IN THIS CHAPTER IS
CONCLUDED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
35. They who, with their eye-of-wisdom come to know the
distinction between the "Field" and the "Knower-of-the-Field, "
and of the liberation from the "PRAKRITI of the being, " go to
the Supreme.
985
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After explaining that the Spirit is the Illuminator, and that,
being the Illuminator, It cannot be tainted by the qualities
of the illumined, here Lord Krishna directly advocates that
man's life is fulfilled only when he, in his subtle
discrimination, successfully meditates upon and realises
the constitution, behaviour and relationship among the
"Field," "the Knower-of-the-Field," and the "Supreme Self"
in himself. This can be done only with a well-integrated
instrument, a combination of a fully developed head-and-
heart, which alone can apprehend the Invisible,
Imperishable, One. The faculty that comes to experience
this divine infinitude is often termed as "intuition," and in
the language of the Hindu Shastras, it is called the "Eye-of-
Wisdom."
They who realise and perceive the nature and the essential
distinction between the "Field," the "Knower-of-the-Field"
and the "Supreme," and thus come to experience the non-
existence of the "Field" (Prakriti or Avidya or Avyakta), and,
therefore, the "Knower-of-the-Field" (the individuality, the
ego, the samsarin, the limited), theirs is the Knowledge
Absolute. The "Field" is the material-cause, which has no
existence apart from mere imaginations and
hallucinations. Non-apprehension of Reality gives rise to
mis-apprehensions of It. To realise the non-existence of the
very material-cause is to live the Infinite Nature of the
Supreme Self in ourselves, as ourselves.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
986
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the thirteenth
discourse ends entitled: THE FIELD AND THE KNOWER-
OF-THE-FIELD
This is one of the most brilliant chapters in the Geeta
which gives us a direct subjective method of meditating
upon and realising the Imperishable and the Eternal in
ourselves. To wake up from our dream is to end all the
sorrow that we might have suffered in the dream-state-of-
Consciousness. There is no traffic between the frontiers
that clearly mark out the worlds of waking, dreaming and
the deep-sleep. In the same way, the Knower-of-the-Field
suffers the sorrows and the imperfections of the "Field"
but when through analysis the "Knower-of-the-Field"
understands its own real nature apart from the "Field," it
rediscovers its own Divine Nature and, in this awakening,
the dream that it was as the Knower-of-the-Field, ends.
The plurality and the sorrows are all the tearful details in
the dream-plot. To rediscover Pure Awareness and to
realise that it is the Self, which, dressed up in the "Field,"
becomes the agitated "Knower-of-the-Field" --- is to know
all that is to be known. In the entire Geeta, we fail to come
across a clearer and more direct indication of Reality.
Om Om Om Om Om
987
