Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 14
Gunatraya Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of Gunas
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I will again declare (to you) that
Supreme Knowledge, the best of all knowledges, having known
which, all the sages have attained Supreme Perfection after this
life.
Even a very intelligent man will need repeated
consolation when he is extremely agitated by any dire
emotion. He who identifies himself with his outward
personality and behaves as a finite mortal, cannot, in his
life of agitations and sorrows, easily comprehend and
appreciate that in his essential nature, he is the Infinite,
the Divine. Spiritual truths are to be constantly repeated,
again and again, by the teacher, until the student's
rebellious intellect apprehends them sufficiently. A
mother feeding a little baby in an Indian home is a typical
example; the mother will have to coax the child repeatedly
until sufficient food goes into its stomach. Similarly,
spiritual ideas will have to be repeated many times by the
teachers until they develop into strong inward personal
convictions in the student.
Therefore, the chapter opens with a declaration by the
Lord, "AGAIN WILL I TELL THEE." Not that the Supreme
988
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
theme has not yet been declared, but, for the purposes of
elucidation and correct appreciation, repetition is
unavoidable.
The theme of this chapter declared here is, "THAT
SUPREME KNOWLEDGE WHICH IS BETTER THAN
ALL OTHER KNOWLEDGES." This should not be taken
too literally. The subject-matter of the chapter deals with
the behaviour of man and the different influences that
play on his subtle body in life. This cannot be the Supreme
theme in philosophy. But it is declared here as the "highest
Knowledge," inasmuch as, without a correct
understanding of this theme, and without self-detection
and timely self-correction of the mental mechanism, it will
be impossible for a seeker to walk safely the path divine.
HAVING KNOWN WHICH, ALL THE MUNIS HAVE
ATTAINED TO THE HIGHEST PERFECTION --- A
precise knowledge of the gunas, it is claimed here, will
make the pilgrimage easier for all seekers. A true and
exhaustive knowledge of the 'path,' the possible dangers
en-route, the difficulties that might arise --- these should
pre-warn a pilgrim and he can undertake his journey well
equipped to meet all these possible dangers. An
understanding of the possible mischiefs of the mind is a
healthy warning to a diligent student of spirituality, so
that he can easily avoid the usual dangers, and meet his
subjective problems efficiently whenever they arise in
him.
989
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Muni does not mean an old man with a beard, living in a
jungle, eating roots and berries, but it means, "A man of
reflection and contemplation" (Manana Sheelavan). Thus,
an understanding of the gunas, their nature and their
tyranny, when and how they rise up in revolt against our
peaceful progress, are all preliminary information useful
for all Men-of-Reflection, who constantly digest and
assimilate their experiences in life and thereby gain
"wisdom."
AFTER THIS LIFE --- The attainment of Perfection is
promised here, as in many Upanishads, "AFTER THIS
LIFE." Some thinkers take this declaration too literally and
say that Perfection cannot be gained in this life while
living here. Very efficiently and logically, Shri
Shankaracharya and others break up this argument and
assert, again and again, that Perfection can be gained, here
and now, by any diligent seeker. According to these
Acharyas "AFTER THIS LIFE" means "at the end of our
ego-centric misconceptions of life."
Even in our life, we find that the bachelor must die to
become the married man; the virgin must die before she
becomes a mother. In the above cases, the person is not
dead but bachelor-hood and virginity have ended, so that
they may acquire husband-hood and mother-hood. Thus,
the individuals remaining the same, their status changes.
Through right reflection and true understanding, our false
values-of-life can end, and in the newly found "wisdom," a
life of better illumination and greater equanimity can be
990
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
lived. This hatching of the 'perfect,' out of its shell-like
imperfections around, is achieved in the inward warmth
of constant contemplation. The mind of an individual who
lives diligently with intellectual dynamism, may come
under the destructive influences of any of these gunas, and
thereby lose its serene equilibrium in contemplation.
Avoid it and cent-percent success is assured. Thus a
knowledge of the three gunas and their behaviour helps
indirectly every enthusiastic seeker.
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO DECLARE THAT THIS
"KNOWLEDGE" DEFINITELY LEADS TO SUPREME
PERFECTION:
2. They who, having refuge in this "Knowledge, " have attained
to My Being, are neither born at the time of Creation, nor are
they disturbed at the time of dissolution.
The greatness of the "knowledge" contained in the chapter
is not so much in its philosophical implications as in the
benefit which is available to a seeker who diligently
makes use of it. He who has realised correctly the deep
significances in this chapter, can reach the State-of-
Perfection; he shall "ATTAIN TO MY BEING" says the
Lord.
Whenever Krishna uses the first person singular 'I' in the
Geeta he indicated the State of Spiritual Perfection. The
theme of the chapter, as we have already indicated, is a
991
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
thorough study of the play of the gunas that bind us down
to the lower plane of matter identifications, and therefore,
to the ego-sense. When once we get away from the gunas
and totally stop their play in our mental life, we get
redeemed from our limited sense of individuality, and
instantaneously, we shall experience our Absolute
Universal Nature.
The sorrows of the dream --- though very true to the
dreamer while he dreams --- cannot affect him the
moment he wakes up. The joys and sorrows belonging to
one plane-of-Consciousness cannot stretch their arms to
throttle us in another plane-of-Consciousness. A seeker
who has, through meditation, mastered his mind and has
transcended it, and therefore, has reached beyond the
ordinary realms of Consciousness, cannot thereafter have
any sense of finitude and the consequent material
sorrows, as in his earlier days of Matter identifications. He
rediscovers himself to be the Omnipresent Reality, which
knows neither Creation nor dissolution, in Its Absolute
State.
This is indicated here: NEITHER ARE THEY BORN AT
THE TIME OF CREATION --- Creation is a trick of the
mind and when we are no more expressing through the
mind, and therefore, no longer conditioned by it, we
cannot have the experience of any "Creation." When anger
conquers my mind, I experience and behave as an angry
man; but when anger has receded and my mind is calmed,
I can no longer continue to behave as a bad-tempered
992
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
man. The tricks of the mind consist in projecting a world-
of-Creation, thought by thought, and in feeling oneself
irredeemably conditioned by one's own imaginations. As
long as one is drowned in the mind, the storms of the
bosom must necessarily toss one about. On transcending
the mind, we realise the Self and its Infinite Nature, and
therefore, there is no Creation; nor shall we feel ourselves
as having been born.
NOR ARE THEY DISTURBED AT THE TIME OF
DISSOLUTION --- The sorrows of destruction are the
pangs of death. While dreaming one can go through the
sorrows of a dream-death, and yet, if at that time one
wakes up, one will at that very moment, laugh at one's
sorrows at the delusory death-pangs suffered in the
dream. Having realised the Absolute Nature, thereafter in
that State of Infinite Existence, one can no longer
experience either the sorrows of death or the troubles of
finitude.
But in order to conquer the mind, a seeker must know
very clearly the tricks by which the mind generally
hoodwinks him. A knowledge of the strategy of our
enemies is an essential prerequisite to plan out our attacks
successfully.
The stanza is, therefore, right when it declares that a
thorough knowledge of the gunas will be helpful to
everyone trying to master his own mind and reach the
993
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
freedom from all its moral agitations and ethical
imperfections.
THE FOLLOWING TWO STANZAS EXPLAIN HOW
THE UNIVERSE IS EVOLVED BY THE UNION
BETWEEN SPIRIT AND MATTER --- Spirit enveloped in
Matter is the pluralistic expression of Existence in the
world. From the inert stone to the greatest Prophet-of-
Wisdom, every existence is but the Spirit expressing
through Matter-vestures. In an earlier chapter, we have
already seen very clearly how the "Knower-of-the-Field"
working in the "Field" and identifying himself with it,
becomes the individualised "Ego," extremely sensitive to
the sorrows and tragedies, joys, and successes
of its environments.
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO EXPLAIN, IN WHAT
WAY THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN THE "KNOWER-OF-
THE-FIELD" AND THE "FIELD" TAKES PLACE, AND
HOW THE UNION COMES TO BREED OUR ENDLESS
SORROWS:
3. My womb is the great BRAHMAN (MULA PRAKRITI) ;
in that I place the germ; from which, O Bharata, is the birth of
all beings.
MY WOMB IS THE GREAT BRAHMAN (MULA
PRAKRITI) --- Krishna, the Pure Consciousness, is trying
994
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
to explain the "One-Womb" from which the entire
Universe has arisen. On many occasions, in our
discourses, we had stopped to explain how the One-
Consciousness, identifying with various layers of Matter,
manifests Itself as different entities, with different
potentialities. A Prime Minister is also a voter --- just a
single voter under the constitution of the country. But a
Prime Minister's powers are a million times more than any
average voter can ever hope to have. This omnipotency is
gained by his OFFICE, because the voter in him has been
successful in identifying himself with the "heart" of the
majority of voters.
The Supreme, identifying Itself with the subtle Vasanas in
an individual, becomes an individualised "Ego." If any one
of us (as a single voter) can renounce his limited
tendencies and identify himself with the total thought-life
of the Universe (the total aspirations of the Janata), the
Consciousness that identified Itself with 'total mind' (the
individual who identifies himself with the majority of
voters) becomes the Ishwara (Prime Minister).
In the stanza, in the language of Vedanta, it is said that the
total-Vasanas of the world, meaning the "total-causal-
body," is the "Womb," which gets impregnated by the
Lord. When life functions as the "total-causal-body," it
becomes dynamic and expresses itself as the "total-mind-
intellect" (Hiranya-garbha).
995
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It has already been explained that the Light of
Consciousness conditioned by the mind and intellect-
reflected in the mental pool of thought --- is the sense-of-
ego, the individuality, manifest in each of us. The total
potential factor, from which the world-of-matter emerges,
is termed as Nature --- Prakriti. The Prakriti then is called
the 'Great Cause,' because it embraces the entire Universe
which is but its effect. Again, from Nature, the entire
Universe has arisen and the Universe of names and forms
is nourished and fattened by the very source which has
given birth to it. Therefore, the total nature is termed here,
as elsewhere in Vedanta, as the Great (Mahat)-Brahma, the
total-mind-intellect-equipments.
IN THAT, I PLACE THE GERM --- This total potential
Nature is the virgin "Womb," in which, when the shaft of
Consciousness penetrates, the Light of Awareness that
consequently plays in it, is Its act of impregnation.
Thus vitalised by Life, the inert Prakriti becomes
dynamised, grows and manifests itself as the spectacular
Universe. Hence it is said, "FROM WHICH IS THE BIRTH
OF ALL BEINGS."
Every creative action owes its origin and progress to a
tendency for it in the artist. When this tendency in him
becomes vibrant with a part of the life in him, it becomes
potential, struggles to express itself in terms of ideas and
feelings, and later on gets expressed in the particular
medium of art chosen by the artist. He may express it
996
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
through colours, as in painting; through songs, as in
music; through stones, as in sculpture; or through words,
as in literature. But a dead artist can no more express
anything --- even in terms of artistic ideas or thoughts. The
total Universe of ideas and tendencies (Vasanas), when
graced by Life, becomes vigorous and expresses as the
Universe created.
The world of Vasanas, of ideas, of thoughts, and of actions,
together constituting the total Nature, is ever controlled
and directed by the gunas, and therefore, the three gunas
are together called in Vedanta as Maya, the "cause of the
Universe." Maya, expressed in the individual bosom, is
called 'ignorance'(avidya). The 'ignorance'is, therefore, the
microcosmic expression of Maya, and the total
"ignorance," in its macrocosmic expression, is Maya. An
individualised EGO is under the control of avidya, while
Maya is under the control of Ishwara.
We are only to remember that we have been told already
in the previous chapter, viz., that the "Field" and the
"Knower-of-the-Field" are the two aspects of Nature
(Prakriti), and both of them function on the same
Substratum, the Absolute Eternal Truth, the Lord Krishna
Himself. The Supreme, functioning in the "Field," becomes
the Enjoyer-
of-the-Field, and therefore, the "Knower-of-the-Field,"
detaching from the "Field," rediscovers himself to be the
Pure Absolute Consciousness.
997
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
CONTINUING TO ELABORATE THIS SUBTLE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MATTER AND SPIRIT,
AND EXPLAINING HOW THE ABSOLUTE IS THE
UNCONTAMINATED AND EVER-VITALISING
PRINCPLE IN BOTH THE "FIELD" AND IN THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD":
4. Whatever forms are produced, O Kaunteya, in all the wombs
whatsoever, the great BRAHMA is their womb, and I the seed-
giving Father.
IN ALL WOMBS --- In the living world, infinite varieties
of beings are born and continue to live, and they are
replaced at every moment by millions of new births. If the
whole Universe is looked at in one gaze, we find therein,
seething activities of new births. Everywhere, the birth of
an organism is nothing but an expression of Spirit through
a given matter-envelopment. Thus viewed, every Matter
particle is the "womb," which, when dynamised by the
"Light of Consciousness," becomes a potential living
being. Every expression of life is Matter containing within
its bosom a tiny spark of the Spirit.
Lord Krishna, as the Supreme Consciousness, Absolute
and Infinite, declares here figuratively: "I AM THE
FATHER OF THE UNIVERSE," who places the sperm-of-
life in the womb-of-Nature (Prakriti). A "Field," in itself,
has no existence without the "Knower-of-the-Field"
vitalising it. A steam engine, minus steam, is only so much
998
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
iron in that particular shape! But when steam passes
through it, the engine expresses its motive force and
strength, and its particular ability, locomotion. Similarly,
the body-mind-intellect are only so much minerals unless
Consciousness expresses Itself, through it. No doubt, a
bachelor, in himself, can have no child to claim as his own,
however potent he may be. He has to get married and his
seed is to be placed in the womb. The Spirit cannot
express Itself without the Matter. These ideas are
summarised in this stanza when Lord Krishna says that
He is the Eternal Father, who impregnates the entire
world-of-Matter and arranges the play of life on the stage
of the world.
The Geeta happened to be declared and written long
before Christ, and therefore, the Bible cannot claim, as
some of us have been coaxed to believe, that the great
Fatherhood of God is a fact recognised ONLY by the
Christian faith. At best, we can say that it is an idea
borrowed from earlier religions. The Hindus did not over-
emphasise this Father-hood of God, because, even though
the idea is quite poetic, philosophically, if cannot hold
much water. But as later religions found such ideas more
easily digestible for the not-so-intelligent masses, they
seem to have borrowed them liberally.
TAKING UP THE MAIN THEME OF THE CHAPTER,
LORD KRISHNA EXPLAINS WHAT THE "GUNAS" ARE,
AND HOW THEY BIND THE SPIRIT WITHIN MATTER
TO CREATE THE INDIVIDUALISED EGO-SENSE IN US:
999
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
5. Purity, passion, and inertia --- these qualities (GUNAS) , O!
mighty-armed, born of "PRAKRITI" bind, the Indestructible,
Embodied one, fast in the body.
GUNAS BORN OF PRAKRITI --- It is indeed difficult to
find an adequate rendering for the word "guna" in English.
The tradition of thought in the West has nothing
equivalent to these terms, as the science of psychology in
the West is even today passing through its very early
childhood. The influences (gunas) under which the
thoughts function in each bosom, will be considered by it
only when analytical and experimental psychology has
exhausted its observations and study.
The concept of Sattwa is rather that of perfect purity and
luminosity, the opposite of "foul-darkness" called Tamas,
and distinctly different from the "dusky-colour" of Rajas.
We find in our literature that these gunas are associated
with-light (Sattwa), red-colour (Rajas) and darkness
(Tamas).
The term guna also means 'rope,' by which, the spiritual
beauty of life in us is tied down to the inert and insentient
Matter-vestures. In short, gunas are the three different
influences under which every human mind has to play in
such an endless variety at different moments of its
changing environments.
1000
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
These gunas are born of Matter. Produced by Nature, the
"Field," they generate a feeling of attachment, and
successfully delude the indwelling Self and chain It AS IT
WERE, to the cycle of birth-and-death, in a stream of
constant change and pain. The gunas have no separate
existence as attributes inherent in a substance. All that we
can say is that they are as many different mental climates
in which the minds behave so differently from each other,
according to their given moods, governed by the
predominating gunas at any particular moment of
observation.
These gunas, like chords, AS IT WERE, bind the Spirit to
Matter and create, in the Infinite Spirit, the painful sense
of limitations and sorrows. The Infinite and All-pervading
Spirit can never be contaminated by the dreamy
projections of a delusory world-of-Matter. The ghost that
emerges from a post cannot leave its marks on the post.
Even after murdering a dozen people in my dream, my
hands, that were dripping with blood, cannot, when I
wake up, carry any blood stains. While dreaming, no
doubt, the "dream world" of my own imaginations was
real to the dreamer in me. But, on waking, the waker in
me cannot have any marks left over on him from the
dream. Similarly, the Eternal Life, functioning in Matter,
gets, AS IT WERE, bound to the limitations and finitude of
Matter, and this delusory experience is continued as long
as the gunas bind It to and entangle It in Matter.
1001
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Now it becomes evident how a clear understanding of
what constitutes the gunas and how they bind us to Matter
will provide us surely with a charter of freedom, a scheme
for getting ourselves freed from the tentacles of our own
imaginations.
The embodied-self, though Indestructible and Infinite, in
Its identifications and attachments with the body, feels the
changes in the body as Its own changes. This delusion is
maintained, in each one of us, by the play of the three
gunas in us. In the following stanzas, we have a clear
enumeration of the behaviour of the mind when it comes
under the influence of each of these gunas separately.
OF THESE THREE GUNAS, "SATTWA" IS THUS
DEFINED:
6. Of these, "SATTWA" which because of its stainlessness, is
luminous and healthy, (unobstructive) . It binds by (creating)
attachment to 'happiness' and attachment to 'knowledge, ' O
sinless one.
Nothing can be defined as such --- this is an accepted fact
in all sciences. No disease can be defined by itself; nor can
any emotion be described as such --- without explaining
its symptoms and expressions. So too, no gunas can be
defined directly. In the following stanzas we find
descriptions of a mind under the influence of each of these
gunas, by enumerating the type of emotions that are
1002
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
aroused in it, and its peculiar and distinct behaviours.
This symptomatic description is, no doubt, more helpful
to us, the seekers, because each of us can observe and
analyse the types of emotions and thoughts arising in our
mind-intellect equipments and determine what type of
guna is governing us at any given time.
BECAUSE OF ITS STAINLESSNESS, SATTWA IS
LUMINOUS --- When Sattwa comes to dominate as the
most important influence in our thought-life, because of
its purity, it is ever luminous --- it has neither the dull-
colour of Rajas, nor the dark impurities of Tamas. Under
the Sattwa-influence, the mind is steady, reflecting ever
faithfully, the Consciousness, the Self.
FREE FROM EVIL i. e. HEALTHY --- Evil tendencies must
rise in the mind long before the action expressing the
same is committed in the world outside; as the thought, so
the actions. Thus the evil starts germinating in the mental
life. We call that an evil whereby we try to satisfy the
appetites of the flesh, the selfish agitations of the mind
and the ego-centric desires of our head. Ego-centric self-
gratification is the womb from which all evils are born.
Such low impulses and confusions can arise only when
the mind is under the influence of Rajas and Tamas.
Therefore, what is meant here is, Sattwa is free from all
evils, as it is relatively free from Rajasic agitations or
Tamasic darkness. Though Sattwa is thus the most divine
mental attitude, still it binds us and acts as a limitation on
our divine nature.
1003
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SATTWA BINDS BY ATTACHMENT TO 'HAPPINESS'
AND 'KNOWLEDGE' --- When the mind is purified from
all its agitations (Rajas) and the intellect is cleansed of its
agitations (Rajas) and the intellect is cleansed of its low
passions and criminal lusts (Tamas), no doubt, the
personality becomes purified, experiencing a greater share
of inward peace and happiness and enjoys a greater share
of subtle understanding and intellectual comprehension.
But even these can create a bondage on the freedom of the
Absolute Self. A gold-chain, if sufficiently strong can also
bind as any iron-chain. "Goodness," though it gives us
freedom from all vulgarities, can also shackle us within its
own limitation! A perfect one, absolutely free, is bound
neither by goodness, nor by evil.
Consciousness, the All-pervading Principle of Awareness,
expressed as the Self, in each one of us, does not directly
comprehend any object or idea in the world outside. What
we generally understand as intelligence is the Eternal
Light of Consciousness, reflected in our mind-intellect-
equipment. Naturally therefore, the capacity to perceive
the world intelligently, differs from person to person
because in no two of us the inner equipments can be the
same.
The reflection in a reflecting medium, will depend entirely
upon the cleanliness and steadiness of the medium. If the
mind is clean and the intellect steady, a more efficient
intelligence is manifest. Thus, whenever a given mind is in
an inspiring and creative mood, it is actually intelligent
1004
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and it is capable of taking longest flights into the realms of
wisdom. On all such occasions of vast knowing and deep
understanding, the inner equipment is under the influence
of Sattwa, wherein the agitations, created by Rajas, and the
murkiness, created by Tamas, do not express themselves.
Sattwa also binds the Infinite to Matter through the
attachment to 'knowledge' and 'happiness'. When once
one has experienced the thrilling joys of creative thinking
and the inspiring life of goodness and wisdom one gets so
attached to them that one will thereafter sacrifice anything
around in order to live constantly that subtle joy. A true
scientist, working self-dedicatedly in his laboratory; a
painter working at his canvas in his shabby studio, pale
with hunger and weak with disease; a poet hunted out
from society, living in public parks, seeking his own joys
in his own visions and words; martyrs facing cruel
persecutions; politicians suffering long years of exile;
mountaineers embracing death --- are all examples of
how, having known the subtler thrills of a higher joy,
when the bosom is inspired with Sattwa, the individual
becomes as much bound with attachment to them as
others are to their own material joys and possessions.
NOW THE DIAGNOSIS OF 'RAJAS,' WHEN IT COMES
TO PLAY ITS HAVOC IN THE HUMAN BOSOM:
1005
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
7. Know thou "RAJAS" (to be) of the nature of passion, the
source of thirst and attachment; it binds fast, O Kaunteya, the
embodied one, by attachment to action.
A seeker, who is striving to conquer his own mind must
know all its subtle inclinations by which, again and again,
his thoughts run amuck only to return and increasingly
sabotage his inner personality.
KNOW "RAJAS" TO BE THE NATURE OF PASSION ---
Where there is an onslaught of Rajoguna--Influences in the
bosom, man's mind is wrecked with a hundred painful
passions. Passions are the main symptoms of the working
of Rajoguna in the psychological field. Passion expresses
itself in a million different urges, desires, emotions, and
feelings. Yet, all of them can fall only under two distinct
categories: desires and attachments. Thus, in the Geeta,
Lord Krishna mentions these two as the very sources from
which all passions arise.
GIVES RISE TO THIRST AND ATTACHMENT --- The
term used in Sanskrit for 'desire' is 'thirst'. When an
individual is thirsty, nothing, for the time being, is of as
much importance as water, which alone can satisfy his
thirst. Just as a thirsty man would struggle and suffer,
wanting nothing but water to relieve his pangs, so too, a
human personality thirsts for the satisfaction of every
desire that burns him down. Once the desire is fulfilled, a
sense of attachment comes like a vicious passion to
smother down all the peace and joy of the mind. DESIRE
1006
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is our mental relationship towards 'objects' which have
not yet been acquired by us and ATTACHMENT is the
mental slavishness binding us to the objects so acquired.
These two --- DESIRE for the acquisition of things and the
creation of situations which are expected to yield a certain
quota of personal happiness, and the sense of clinging
ATTACHMENT to things already so acquired --- are the
volcanoes that constantly throw up their molten lava to
scorch and raze the smiling fields of life. The burning lava,
that is emitted by these fiery mountains, comprising the
various passions that man expresses in his sensual life,
make up the strifes and struggles to acquire, to possess
and to guard what is already gained.
IT BINDS FAST THE EMBODIED ONE BY
ATTACHMENT TO ACTION --- When once an individual
has come under the influence of Rajas, he expresses
innumerable desires, and bound in his own attachments,
he lives on in the world manifesting a variety of passions.
Such a passionate being-goaded by his desires for things
not yet acquired, and crushed under the weight and
responsibility of his attachments to things that he
possesses --- can never keep quiet but must necessarily act
on endlessly earning and spending, and yet thirsting for
more and more. Anxious to have more, fearing to lose, he
becomes entangled in the joys of his successes, involved in
the pangs of his failures, and lives as an "embodied-one,"
chained by his own actions.
1007
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Actions are born of passions. Passions arise from desires
and attachments. And all these are the symptoms of the
presence of the Rajoguna-influences upon our mind. Thus,
if Sattwa-guna binds us with its own anxieties for
happiness and peace, wisdom and knowledge, as has been
said in the previous stanza, Rajo-guna also seemingly
binds the Infinite Self to Matter-vestures and makes It
play the part of a limited being through an endless array
of inexhaustible actions. Though the Self is not an agent
(ACTOR), Rajas makes It act with the idea "I AM THE
DOER."
TAMAS ALSO HELPS TO BIND THE DIVINE TO THE
MORTAL FLESH. HOW?
8. But, know thou TAMAS is born of ignorance, deluding all
embodied beings, it binds fast, O Bharata, by heedless-ness,
indolence and sleep.
TAMAS IS BORN OF 'IGNORANCE' --- Under the
influence of Tamas man's intellectual capacity to
discriminate between the right and wrong gets veiled and
he starts acting as if under some hallucination or
stupefaction. Lord Krishna says that Tamas, in the human
personality, binds it to its lower nature by providing it
with endless misconceptions and miscomprehensions of
the true divine purpose of life, which, naturally, forces one
in that condition to live in indolence, heedless of the
higher purposes. One thereafter lives ever asleep to the
1008
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
nobler and the diviner aspirations of life. There is no
consistency of purpose, brilliance of thought, tenderness
of emotion, or nobility of action in an individual who
comes under the contamination of the Tamoguna-
influences.
So far, the Lord has been systematically mentioning the
symptoms which are observed in our mental life when
these gunas pollute our inner tranquillity. These three
gunas not only bring about different amounts of divine
brilliance in a given individual but also limit the Eternal
Self, in all Its perfection, to feel and act as THOUGH It is
limited and conditioned by the matter-envelopments.
AGAIN, THE ACTIONS OF THE 'GUNAS' IN OUR
INNER WORLD ARE BRIEFLY INDICATED:
9. SATTWA attaches to happiness, RAJAS to action, O
Bharata, while TAMAS, verily, shrouding knowledge, attaches
to heedlessness.
These are the ideas that have already been described in
the three stanzas; but, the Geeta is given out as a
conversation between two individuals; a Divine Man-of-
Wisdom, anxious to help the other, who is an ordinary
man of average intelligence.
SATTWA ATTACHES ITSELF TO HAPPINESS --- An
individual, who has experienced the thrills of the creative
1009
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
moments in life --- a scientist, an artist, a poet, or for that
matter any independent thinker --- will not ever like to
come down to the passionate world of Rajas, or into the
dark sorrows of Tamas. Sattwa makes us attached to the
inward happiness, arising from life fully lived.
RAJAS TO ACTION --- If, on the other hand, one is under
the influence of Rajas, it makes one naturally passionate
with hundreds of thirsty 'desires' and deep 'attachments,'
and in the course of their fulfilment, one is made to sweat
and toil in the fields of endless activities.
TAMAS, SHROUDING KNOWLEDGE ATTACHES ONE
TO HEEDLESS-NESS --- When Tamas comes to play, by its
very nature, it veils right judgement, and in the resultant
indiscriminations, we get attached to wrong
comprehensions. We become heedless to the calls of the
Higher in us.
WHEN DO THE 'GUNAS' PRODUCE THE EFFECTS
DESCRIBED ABOVE?
10. Now SATTWA rises (prevails) , O Bharata, having over-
powered RAJAS and inertia (TAMAS) ; now RAJAS, having
over-powered SATTWA and inertia; and inertia (TAMAS) ,
having over-powered SATTWA and RAJAS.
At this level of our discussion, any intelligent student
should wonder whether these gunas produce their effects,
1010
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
or act, at different times, each by turn. If they act, all at one
time, do they act in perfect concord, or in mutual discord?
Naturally, the Lord, in His Divine Song, anticipates this
doubt, and answers it in this stanza. He explains how
these gunas act at different times --- each one of them
becoming prominent and powerful for the time being.
SATTWA RISES --- The stanza clearly shows that at any
given moment, a human personality, if analysed, can be
found to work under the influence of one predominating
guna, wherein the other two gunas are not totally absent,
but are only of secondary importance. When we say that
one is under the influence of Sattwa, it means that Rajas
and Tamas in him are, at that given moment, not quite
prominent to contribute enough of their particular nature.
Thus, when Sattwa predominates over Rajas and Tamas, it
produces, in that bosom, at that time, its own nature of
happiness and knowledge.
When Rajas predominates over Sattwa and Tamas, it
expresses its own nature of passions and desires,
attachments and actions.
When Tamas predominates over Sattwa and Rajas, it
produces its own effects of shrouding knowledge and
making the personality heedless of its nobler duties.
1011
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
BUT HOW ARE WE TO KNOW WHEN A PARTICULAR
'GUNA'IS PREDOMINATING OVER THE OTHER
'GUNAS'?
11. When, through every gate (sense) in this body, the light-of-
intelligence shines, then it may be known that 'SATTWA' is
predominant.
Here follows a discussion of three stanzas, each giving us
a more subjective insight into the symptoms produced by
the guna concerned, from which we can understand,
under the influence of which guna the personality is
working at any given moment.
WHEN THROUGH EVERY GATE (SENSE) IN THIS
BODY, THE LIGHT-OF-INTELLIGENCE SHINES --- The
apertures of the physical structure, through which the
perceived world-of-objects enters us, are the windows-of-
knowledge, the "sense organs." Through these holes, the
Light-of-Awareness, goes out, AS IT WERE, to illumine
the various objects of the world. The Knowledge in me
pouring out through the eyes, becomes the power of
vision and illumines for me all the forms and colours of
the world. The same Eternal Awareness, through the ears,
which cannot illumine form, brings within my
comprehension the world-of-sound around me. So too, the
Divine Light of Cognition beaming out through the
tongue illumines the taste.
1012
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, "seven tongues of flame" shoot out from the same
Fire-of-Knowledge, the Self, in us. Each beam of light, as it
emerges from each window in the body, illumines one
aspect of the world outside. It must be the experience of
all that, while we are perceiving something, and efficiently
illumining it, we are really in a state of Sattwa, at this
moment. If there be at the time Rajas and Tamas in us, our
perception is hampered.
If the mind is agitated by Rajas and the intellect is veiled
by Tamas, even ordinary, efficient perceptions become
almost impossible. Thus, the more often and more
completely we go beyond Rajas and Tamas, and thereby
make our bosom full of Sattwa, the more grows our
capacity to observe, to analyse, to understand and to
become aware of the world outside and judge it correctly.
It has already been explained that the mechanism of
knowing the world outside is the intellect; and, the
Consciousness, reflected in the intellect, is the light-of-
intelligence by which we illumine the world of ideas,
feelings and objects available in our life. The sunlight
outside never comes directly to a room to illumine the
things in the room. It is always the light of the Sun
reflected on the walls that illumines a cosy room. Similarly
the Light of Consciousness, reflected in the intellect, is the
beam of light that illumines the world-of-objects. The
gunas are the influences under which the mind and
intellect live.
1013
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is very well known that a clean and steady reflecting
medium will reflect more efficiently than an unsteady,
unclean surface. Rajas creates agitations and makes the
intellect unsteady; Tamas created veilings and makes the
intellect unclean. Naturally, the greater the proportion of
Rajas and Tamas in a bosom, the lesser will be its quota of
intelligence. Therefore, it is highly scientific to say that, "at
the moment of knowing and comprehending the world,"
one's bosom is surely in its pure Sattwik-MOOD.
THE CHARACTERISTIC MARKS THAT INDICATE THE
PRE-DOMINANCE OF "RAJAS" ARE DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING:
12. Greed, activity, undertaking of actions, restless-ness longing
--- these arise when RAJAS is predominant, O best in the
Bharata family.
GREED, ACTIVITY, ENTERPRISE, (UNDERTAKING-OF-
ACTIONS) UNREST (RESTLESS-NESS), LONGING ---
Enumerating the type of thoughts and motives that rise
up in a mind in which Rajas predominates, Lord Krishna
lists the following as the most important. GREED is the
inexhaustible desire to appropriate the property of
another, an appetite which has the tendency of growing
more in volume as we satisfy it. By "ACTIVITY" is meant
here, officially engaging oneself in matters which are not
one's own. The term ENTERPRISE is here used to indicate
all activities motivated by extreme egoism, undertaken
1014
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
with the intention to fulfil and satisfy the ego-centric, and
therefore, the selfish desires. RESTLESSNESS is another
type of experience that is lived through by a Rajasic
personality. Because of restlessness, the individual fails to
enjoy quietude. The term UNREST is oscillation of the
mind which is defined as by Shri Shankaracharya "Giving
vent to joy, attachment, etc."
To a large extent these three are inter-connected, and each
successive one can be seen to have risen from the previous
tendency. Greed must make the greedy very active
indeed, and, when an activity motivated by greed is
undertaken, it expresses in selfish enterprises, and once a
man enters such a field of selfish activities --- in his
anxiety for the results, in his mental agitations --- he
creates a set of unhealthy circumstances around him and
gets dragged towards their centre, where he is led to
perpetrate more and more bitter cruelties, base
immoralities and bloody crimes; and his inward quietude
gets completely shattered. He experiences extreme unrest.
Naturally, one who is in this condition of mind, sweating
and labouring in the outer fields, with a heart poisoned by
Rajas, must come under the sway of endless longings ---
for things not-yet-accomplished, for objects not-yet-
acquired, for profits not-yet-gained.
In short, under the contagion of Rajas, the psychological
being in us gets extremely persecuted by its own
restlessness which gets expressed in its endless plans,
exhausting actions, agonising desires, painful longings,
1015
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
maddening greed and oppressive restlessness. When such
an individual works in society, his sorrows do not rest
with himself --- they spread, like contagion, to many
thousands around him.
SIMILARLY, WHEN 'TAMAS' PRE-DOMINATES, WHAT
EXACTLY ARE THE SYMPTOMS? LISTEN:
13. Darkness, inertness, heedlessness and delusion --- these arise
when 'TAMAS' is predominant, O descendant-of-Kuru.
DULLNESS, INERTNESS, HEEDLESSNESS AND
DELUSION --- When these symptoms are recognised by
an individual in himself, according to the Geeta, the
seeker can take it that he is suffering from Tamas. Dullness
(Aprakashah) is that condition of the intellect where it is
incapable of arriving at any decision, a state when a sort of
drowsiness veils the potentialities of one's intelligence and
makes it impossible for one to discriminate between the
right and the wrong. This condition is experienced
everyday by every one of us, as sleep conquers our nature
at night.
INACTION (Apravritti), IDLENESS --- The tendency to
escape all responsibilities, the sense of incapacity to
undertake any endeavour and the lack of enthusiasm to
strive for and achieve anything in the world --- is the state
of inaction explained herein. When Tamas predominates,
all ambitions are sapped. Energy is dormant; capacity is
1016
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
gone, and thereafter, eating and sleeping alone become the
individual's main occupations in life.
The natural effect on the personality of a man who is
living such a life is that, as an individual, he becomes
heedless of the higher calls within himself. Nor can one
be, in fact, a Ravana-like destructive criminal. Even to be
bad, it needs a good amount of enthusiasm and an endless
spirit of activity.
He not only becomes incapable of responding to the good
or the bad in him, but also slowly sinks into delusions. He
miscalculates the world around him, misinterprets his
own possibilities, and always makes mistakes in
determining his relationship with the world around.
When thus an individual fails to understand rightly
himself, the world outside, and his own right relationship
with the world around him, the life becomes an error ---
his very existence, a sad mistake.
After thus indicating how the mind and intellect would
react under the three distinct influences of Sattwa, Rajas
and Tamas, the Gita Acharya wants us to understand that,
not only are these gunas effective while we live the present
embodiment, but the tendencies of the mind, cultivated
and developed, pursued and strengthened while living,
will determine the life and condition of the individual
even after death.
1017
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Life after death is a topic that does not seem to have been
fully thought out in any other school of philosophy except
in the exhaustive Science of Life, Hinduism. All other
creeds have their own different explanations but none of
them actually believes that there is no life after death. The
other creeds have only dogmatic declarations regarding
life after death, but they have no logical thought
development regarding this topic which can be
crystallised into a complete philosophy.
Earlier in the Geeta, we had exhaustively dealt with this
topic of re-incarnation. We had indicated that death is the
total divorce of the subtle-body from its physical-
structure. Therefore, death is the destiny of the body in me
and not a tragedy of my ever-existing personality. I, as my
subtle-body, move out of the present physical-structure,
when I have exhausted my purpose with the present
body. The subtle-body is constituted of my mind-and-
intellect which is nothing but a bundle of thoughts. Even
while I am living in this body, my thoughts determine my
movements, both physical and subtle. Therefore, the
Hindu philosophers are logical when they indicate that
after death, one would still be pursuing the resultant of
one's thoughts, which one had in life while acting through
the body.
When I am transferred from my present station of office to
another area, I can call at my bank and expect to get from
them not the total amount of money I had DEPOSITED in
the past, but only the "BALANCE" that stands to my
1018
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
credit. So too, the resultant of the positive and negative
thoughts entertained, actions done, motives and intentions
encouraged, should determine the type and texture of the
thoughts in us at the moment of our leaving the physical-
structure.
That the quality of our thoughts is influenced by the type
of guna that influences our inner make up is a truth that is
already known. Therefore, it is logical that the
predominant guna, cultivated by each one of us through
the life of activities and thoughts, should determine the
direction and the range of the disembodied, in its flight to
the beyond after its release from the body. These
possibilities are explained in this section of the Geeta.
WHATEVER LIFE IS OBTAINED AFTER DEATH IS
CAUSED BY THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF
DESIRES AND ATTACHMENTS, AND THE NATURE
AND NUMBER OF DESIRES AND ATTACHMENTS
ARE DETERMINED BY THE 'GUNAS'. THIS IS TAUGHT
HERE:
14. If the embodied one meets with death when SATTWA is
predominant, then he attains to the spotless worlds of the
"Knowers of the Highest. "
IF THE EMBODIED ONE MEETS WITH DEATH WHEN
'SATTWA' IS PREDOMINANT --- In the scheme of the
thought-development in Geeta, Krishna now gives us an
1019
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
idea as to the direction in which the mental-equipment of
a dead one will move after death. This can be, to a large
extent, scientifically determined by a close and intelligent
observation of his mental behaviour even during life. A
doctor cannot, all of a sudden one fine morning, start
thinking of and solving a subtle architectural problem nor
can an engineer overnight feel inspired to write out a
prescription for cancer. The doctor has trained his mind
for thinking on medicines and disease and the engineer
has trained himself to solve the problems of constructive
destruction! At any given moment, the mind of a doctor
will be thinking of medicines alone, in conformity with his
education and the type of thoughts his mind is trained to
entertain.
Thus, there is a continuity of thought-life in this
embodiment; this year's thoughts have a continuity with
our last year's thoughts; this month's thoughts are
determined by the last month's thoughts; this week's
thoughts are an extension of last week's thoughts; today's
thoughts are continued tomorrow. And every moment is
an extension of the previous moment's thoughts. If, thus,
there is a continuous development and growth observable
in the thought-life, in its unbroken continuity connecting
the past, the present, and the future into one unbroken
flow, then, there is no reason why, at the time of death,
this continuity should suddenly end. Death is only
another experience; it will certainly colour the thoughts
that follow it --- but then all experiences have been
colouring all our past thoughts, and our future thoughts
1020
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are being coloured by our present experiences. Therefore,
the type of thoughts entertained during our life-time
should determine the type of thoughts we will entertain
soon after our departure from this physical structure.
If the embodied one leaves the present physical structure -
-- and therefore, his present environments and
relationship --- he should continue his thought-life. The
direction in which it will make its flight is determined by
the type of training it had acquired during its sojourn in
its embodied state here.
If Sattwa predominates, then, HE ATTAINS TO THE
SPOTLESS REGIONS OF THE "KNOWERS OF THE
HIGHEST" --- It is a concept in our Scriptures (Agamas)
that the highest realm of abundant joy, unaffected by any
excessive Rajas or Tamas, is the realm of the Creator,
Brahmaloka --- supremely happy and extremely creative.
WHILE IN 'RAJAS,' IF ONE DEPARTS:
15. Meeting death in RAJAS, he is born among those attached
to action; and dying in TAMAS, he is born in the womb of the
senseless.
MEETING DEATH IN RAJAS, HE IS BORN AMONG
THOSE ATTACHED TO ACTION --- If, at the time it
leaves the body, the mind is under the influence of Rajas,
it takes, according to its tendencies and desires, to fulfil
1021
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
them, an embodiment among those who are extremely
attached to action. It means that the mind will seek and
successfully discover a field where it can completely
exhaust its existing tendencies.
On the other hand, if one dies, when one's mind is
drowned in extreme 'Tamas,' one reaches the lower realms
of irrational beings such as the animal and the vegetable
kingdoms.
It is a consoling philosophy, no doubt, to believe that once
having come up the ladder of evolution to become man,
never shall we go into the lower strata of evolution. But it
is against the truth of what we observe around us. We
find, in fact, that even after having been given the best set
of circumstances and environments, the members of the
human community are not all equally ready to make use
of them and evolve in their cultural status. A rich man's
son, having average intelligence and a good start in life, is
not always ready to make use of those conducive
circumstances, but invariably, he lives a careless
unhealthy life and destroys himself later on.
Having been born as rational beings, how many of us
behave with discrimination? A few in society even look up
to the cattle and declare that they have a nobler life and a
happier existence! That is to say, to a minority of bipeds
the life of the quadrupeds is of higher evolution!! And,
when such an idea is entertained in the mind of an
individual, the life of the cattle is no devolution to him,
1022
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
but is only an acquisition of something which he is
thirsting for. To a teetotaller, a drinking booth is nothing
but a den of sorrow and death; but, to the drunkard the
same is his haven of joy and harbour of happiness.
To the Tamasic, to be born in the animal kingdom is a
wonderful chance to exhaust their appetites and to
express fully their nature. Thus, philosophically viewed,
we have to accept without any reservation that the
'Tamasic' must mentally find a complete fulfilment in
animal embodiment. So they are born there to fulfil their
own elected purpose.
HERE FOLLOWS A SUMMARY OF WHAT HAS BEEN
TAUGHT IN THE PRECEDING FEW VERSES:
16. The fruit of good action, they say, is SATTWIC and pure;
verily, the fruit of RAJAS is pain, and the fruit of TAMAS is
ignorance.
In this stanza, Krishna, the great conversationalist, is
summarizing again what he has already mentioned in the
previous stanzas. Herein, he is indicating in brief the
results gained when a psychological being lives the three
gunas severally.
THE FRUIT OF GOOD ACTIONS, THEY SAY, IS
'SATTWIC' AND PURE --- If we carefully analyse, we
shall find that thought is the father of all action. Thoughts
1023
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are the seeds sown, and actions the harvest gathered.
Seeds of weeds cannot but produce weeds; bad thoughts
can manifest only as bad actions. And the negative actions
in the outside world, fatten the wrong tendencies of the
mind and thus multiply the inward agitations.
It is, therefore, true in the logic of our philosophy --- and
extremely true in the logic of our worldly experiences too -
-- that if one is to live a quiet, contented and cheerful life
of service and devotion, of love and kindness, of mercy
and compassion, and live thus a "good life," certainly such
a life indicated the Sattwic nature of one's mind. And such
an individual, living such a noble life, must necessarily
grow in his inward purity.
It may be asked how one can start becoming good when
one is already so bad at present. If actions are the
expressions of thoughts, and if the existing mental nature
is negative, how can we expect such an individual to bring
about a change in the climatic conditions within his
bosom? All religions, the world over, answer this question
in their injunction and insistence that seekers of truth,
devotees of the Lord, votaries of culture --- all must strive
to live ethically a pure, moral, and noble life.
No doubt, disciplining the mind and changing the quality
of thoughts are not easy jobs; but to change to type of
actions and to discipline our external movements is
relatively easy. Therefore, to practise goodness, to
discipline our behaviour, to act the good Samaritan, are all
1024
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the beginning of this great scheme of self-revival. When
noble action is undertaken soon it becomes a habit and
this external habit of discipline tends to discipline the
mind.
Hence, the insistence, in all cultures, that from childhood,
elders must be respected, authority should be obeyed, lies
must not be uttered, scriptures are to be read, education
must be undertaken, cleanliness must be practised etc.
When these are enforced upon the child, it, perhaps, takes
them all as varieties of tyranny under which it is
compelled to live. In the long run, however, these rules
bring about unconsciously a discipline in the minds of the
children.
A thrilling joy of mental serenity, a state of minimum
agitation, a capacity to direct this mental strength of such
a dynamic mind towards any single-pointed self-
application --- these are all indicated as the fruits of good
actions, when the mind grows in Sattwa-guna and purity.
Passions and agitations are the impurities in the mind;
bad actions increase them; good actions, by their very
nature, quieten the mind and sap its passions.
THE FRUIT OF 'RAJAS' IS PAIN --- This phrase only
supports our commentary on the previous one. It has
already been said that Rajas is of the nature of passion,
giving rise to insatiable desires and extreme attachment,
and in our attempts to fulfil them, we get drowned in a
multiplicity of actions. (Stanzas 7, 12). Thus, one with a
1025
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mind under the influence of Rajas, entertains desires, and
in order to pacify the stormy conditions, one is forced to
act in the world outside striving to acquire, to possess, to
keep, to spend, to enjoy, to save, and to preserve what has
been saved. Slowly, the individual is dragged into an
entombing morass of suffocating death, in a stinking pit of
pain and agony. "VERILY THE FRUIT OF RAJAS IS
PAIN."
IGNORANCE IS THE FRUIT OF 'TAMAS' --- That
dullness in action, heedlessness and illusion are the
symptoms of Tamas in our subtle-body, has already been
indicated. Here it is said that Tamas veils our
discriminating capacity and foils our attempts at
understanding and rightly judging the world of things
and beings and the world of happenings around us.
Rajas breeds agitations in the mind. And Sattwa is that
condition within us when the mind has least thought
agitations and the intellect is clear and bright in its
rational and discriminative powers. In short, Sattwa is the
"condition of dynamic quietude" which is the creative
moment in man's inward nature.
AND WHAT ARISES FROM THE 'GUNAS'?
17. Knowledge arises from SATTWA, greed from RAJAS,
heedlessness, delusion and also ignorance arise from TAMAS.
1026
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The functions of the gunas, while they appear on the stage
of the mind-intellect, are explained here.
FROM SATTWA ARISES WISDOM --- It has already been
explained how Pure Consciousness, of Its own accord, has
nothing to illumine or understand. In the Pure,
Homogeneous Self, there is nothing other than Itself for It
to understand, It being the Undivided and Indivisible One
Eternal Truth. Consciousness reflected in the subtle-body
is the 'intelligence' by which we gain knowledge of the
world outside. The knower is the Spirit conditioned by the
mind-intellect. Naturally, when the mind is pure and
serene, when there is the least agitation in it, the light
emerging through it is steady and properly focussed.
Therefore, the result of the predominant Sattwa in our
mind is ultimately the rediscovery of the Self, the
experience of PURE WISDOM.
GREED, FROM 'RAJAS' --- When the mind is seething
with a constant eruption of desires it will be continuously
in a state of agitation, and, in its natural anxiety to pacify
itself, it has to rush out into the world to procure and fulfil
its endless demands; and in doing so it expresses its greed.
HEEDLESSNESS, DELUSION AND IGNORANCE ARISE
FROM 'TAMAS' --- Inertia or indolence, 'Tamas,' veils the
intellect. The capacity to discriminate between the right
and the wrong, and the ability to reject the wrong and
accept the right, are the privileges of man and not the
impulses of an animal. True manhood comes to manifest
1027
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
only when one's intellect is clean and free from all
shackles of false prejudices and wrong tendencies. Tamas
veils the capacity to perceive rightly the world outside,
and it also destroys our powers of right judgement.
When anything is not properly understood it is but
natural that we will misunderstand it. This
misunderstanding of the world outside compels us to
expect joys, which are impossible to arise from the
miserable state of our imperfections. Can there be even a
single cup of sweet-water in the entire expanse of the
saline-waters of the ocean? In a world of change and pain,
how can there be constant joy, or even one instance of
perfect happiness?
And yet, he who is under the deluding effects of Tamas in
himself, miscalculates the world and expects from it these
experiences, which are impossible, and in the delusion,
curses the world for its imperfections!
MOREOVER:
18. Those who are abiding in SATTWA go upwards; the
RAJASIC dwell in the middle; and the TAMASIC, abiding in
the function of the lowest GUNA, go downwards.
In the ladder of evolution, we can conceive of these stages
of development. The lowest state of development is seen
in the vegetable and the animal kingdoms. The middle
1028
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stage of evolution is seen in man who has intelligence,
health and brightness. And a higher state of existence is
seen in the disembodied heavenly beings. Here evolution
means: "a greater awareness of experience, a lesser
amount of agitations and a sharper power of intelligence."
The yard-stick used here to measure evolution is the
quantity of joy or happiness, peace or bliss, experienced
by the being.
No doubt, in this measurement, the stone-life is of zero
evolution, inasmuch as it has no awareness at all of the
world. The plant-life comes next, wherein Consciousness
has dimly started expressing Itself. In the animal
kingdom, this Awareness has become clearer and more
vivid. Of the animals, man is, no doubt, the greatest being
with the fullest Consciousness and the sharpest intellect.
But, man also has his own limitations, and functions only
within a limited field of time and space. The ample
possibilities reached when once these limitations of man
are broken down are indicated as the greatest state of
existence enjoyed by beings of a still higher evolution, and
they are called the "Denizens of Heaven."
Every double-storeyed house must also have its staircase.
Invariably, after climbing a few steps, there is a landing
from which we turn and climb up the rest of the stairs to
reach the rooms on the first floor. Those who are standing
on the lower flight of steps are considered of a lower
evolution. Those who are standing on the landing are of
the middle type and those who are standing on the top-
1029
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
flights are of the highest evolution. The vegetable and the
animal kingdoms stand on the lower rungs. Man stands
on the landing and the Higher Beings on the upper flights
of steps.
Remember, none of them has reached upstairs to enjoy the
comforts of its halls and rooms. Those who are standing
on the landing. have the freedom either to go up or to go
down. If this picture has come into our mind, we have, to
a large extent, understood the concept of evolution as
conceived by Hindu - Philosophy, wherein "the evolution
of a specimen is always measured by the degree of
Consciousness unveiled through Matter in the given
subject under observation."
THE SATTWA-ABIDING GO UPWARDS --- Those who
are living a pure life of discrimination, clear thinking,
right judgement and self-discipline, cultivate more and
more Sattwa in themselves. When the mind is thus kept in
quietude, at once creative and dynamic, it evolves
upwards.
THE RAJASIC DWELL IN THE MIDDLE --- Those who
are of Rajasic nature, with all their desires and agitations,
ambitions and achievements, again and again manifest as
men until they acquire the required purity.
THE TAMASIC GO DOWNWARDS --- Those who are
revelling in misconceptions, heedless of the higher calls in
themselves, deluded by their own lust and passion,
1030
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
existing in a state of drowsiness and inertness, devolve
themselves into the lower natures.
The stanza is only summarising the ideas expressed
earlier, when Krishna discussed the effects of the gunas
even in the continuity of existence after death. But where
then is the release? That even Sattwa binds us with our
attachment to knowledge and happiness has been already
explained. Then when can I be free? All these three,
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, are gunas meaning "ropes," that
bind us down to the flesh and its sorrows, the world and
its imperfections, the mind and its agitations, the intellect
and its throbbings. When is man free to enjoy the
Godhood, as a being totally released from all his contacts
with the pluralistic world and from all his subtle
attachments to it?
So far we were told at length of the nature of the gunas, of
the symptoms from which the most predominating guna
in us can be diagnosed, of their reactions in our life, and of
how they affect our future, etc. We were told that the
predominant gunas in us is the heritage which we gather
from our past and the present is coloured by it and the
future again is determined by the play of these gunas. All
these are but explanations of the causes of bondage --- a
sense of bondage rooted in illusion, arising from the fact
that the Self in us gets identified with the Matter-vestures
around it.
1031
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The experience of the finite world, the misery of the jerks,
the sorrows of its imperfections, the tragedies of its
disappointments --- all together constitute the samsara of
the "ego," which is nothing other than the Infinite Self
(Purusha), expressing through Matter (Prakriti), and
identifying with it. Release can be had only when we
transcend all the gunas.
A patient is suffering from high temperature, excruciating
headache and back pain. All three are symptoms of his
illness. When the fever is down the patient is still
suffering. We can say the patient has fully recovered, not
when these three symptoms have ended, but only when
the patient has also regained his old health and energy.
Similarly, the three gunas may be present in each of us, in
different proportions, but the true release comes not only
when all chains have been snapped --- meaning all the
gunas are transcended --- but when we are also established
in the Spiritual Experience.
This process of escaping from the subjective shackles on
our psychological and intellectual nature is called
"liberation" or Moksha. Bound by their own limitations, the
greater possibilities in us are now idling away in our own
bosoms. To redeem them from their prison-houses of
confusions and pains, agitations and sorrows, passions
and lust, is all that spirituality seeks.
1032
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
TO DESCRIBE THE PATH OF LIBERATION AND
EXPLAIN "MOKSHA" GAINED, FROM A RIGHT
JUDGEMENT OF THE WORLD OUTSIDE, THE
LORD SAYS:
19. When the Seer beholds no agent other than the GUNAS and
knows him who is higher than the GUNAS, he attains to My
Being.
The thought that was developed so far has indeed painted
a miserable picture of the Spirit inescapably entangled in
the three gunas. A student of the Geeta would, at this
stage, perhaps, feel despaired at a false idea that there
may be no escape at all for him. One who is standing in a
running train is himself constantly on the move even
though he is standing motionless! As long as he is
travelling on the train, the movement of the train is also
his movement. But the moment he alights and stands on
the platform the train alone moves, and not he. So too, the
Spirit identifying Itself with, and therefore, riding on the
mind-intellect-equipment, dances to the moods of the
mind determined by the three gunas. To stand apart from
the mind by ending all our identifications with it, is to get
complete freedom from the thraldom of our thought
entanglements.
WHEN THE SEER BEHOLDS --- This art of disentangling
ourselves from our own thought-processes within, is the
1033
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
very art of meditation. A meditator, who is capable of
doing so, will BEHOLD, EXPERIENCE SUBJECTIVELY,
the State of Pure Knowledge, uncontaminated by the
dance of the thoughts. It is called "seeing," not in the sense
one is seeing a table or a chair; God cannot be seen; He is
not an "object" of our perception, or feeling, or thought.
He is the "SUBJECT," that PERCEIVES through us, that
FEELS in us, that THINKS with us. But here the word
"behold" is used only to indicate that the subjective
experience shall be so total, so complete and so
convincing, as when we have actually "SEEN" an object ---
that afterwards there can be no more any speculations
about such an experience! Having seen a thing, no man
can ever have any doubt regarding the appearance of the
thing he has seen.
NO AGENT OTHER THAN THE GUNAS --- The
experiencer of the Self not only realises himself to be the
Infinite but also understands that his ego, which was
previously claiming to be the agent in all his activities,
was none other than these gunas themselves. Gunas
govern and direct the entire thought-life at all times in
everyone of us and, therefore, gunas, here means the very
SUBTLE-BODY. When we say "a crowded assembly of
intelligence" we mean intelligent men. Similarly, please
note carefully, gunas here means the MINDS of
individuals of distinct and differing temperaments.
AND KNOWS HIM WHO WHICH IS HIGHER THAN
THE GUNAS --- The mind cannot function of its own
1034
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
accord, nor can it perceive by itself its feelings, it being a
by-product of inert matter. Consciousness which functions
in and through the mind, making it brilliant and dynamic
must be a principle that is other than the mind. If a bucket
of water looks like molten silver, it must have borrowed
the brilliance from the Sun or the moon, for it to shine
forth. Water in itself has no brilliance. Now, if the
reflection dances or breaks up, it must be because of the
nature of the water in the bucket and not because the Sun
itself is dancing in the sky! The Consciousness reflecting in
the mind is the "agent," the individualised ego (jiva) in us,
who suffers the sense of self-shatterings.
He who has understood that he is not "the reflection in his
own mind" but that which is reflected therein ---
something other than the mind and therefore something
higher than the gunas --- he is the one who has escaped
forever the shackles of all limitations, the tears of all
sorrows and the sighs of all disappointments.
HE ATTAINS TO MY BEING --- An individual who has
thus transcended his own mind and intellect and has
positively rediscovered himself to be that which was
lending to his own mind the capacity to delude himself,
that Man-of-Wisdom becomes the Self. Lord Krishna is
not to be confused with Shri Krishna, the son of Devaki, or
the Divine Flute-player of Vrindavana. He is talking here
as the Life in every one of us and each student of the
Geeta must understand that his own life is talking to the
confused ego within himself.
1035
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A WAKER creates sorrowful situations in himself and
comes to fear and weep, lose and gain, mourn and smile
in his dream. All his joys and sorrows belong to the
"dreamer" in himself. When awake, the dream and the
dream-sorrows end, and the "dreamer" himself becomes
the "waker." If, to the "dreamer" in his sorrows, the
waking-consciousness were to manifest and advise, it
would have repeated this stanza to the "dreamer": "When
you, the dreamer, behold no agent other than the
dreaming mind and know in yourself that which is higher
than the dreaming mind, you shall attain to My being ---
the waking consciousness."
Similarly here, Krishna, the manifested God-
Consciousness is explaining to man that his ego-centric
life and activities, its sorrows and joys, achievements and
despairs --- all belong to the waker-dreamer-sleeper-
personality and on transcending them all, he shall really
AWAKE to the Truth, and there BECOME one with It. A
dreamer, on waking, cannot still remain a dreamer but
must himself become the waker. Similarly, Spirit
entangled in Matter is man and, man disentangled from
its Matter identifications not only rediscovers but also
becomes the Spirit; "ATTAINS TO MY BEING."
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO TEACH HOW ONE
CAN ATTAIN THIS GREAT GOAL:
1036
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
20. The embodied-one having crossed beyond these three
GUNAS out of which the body is evolved, is freed from birth,
death, decay and pain, and attains to Immortality.
So long as you stand near the open oven in the kitchen,
you must necessarily feel the heat of the fire and the
smoke in the atmosphere. To walk out of the kitchen is to
escape both these inconveniences because heat and smoke
are the properties of fire in the oven and not the qualities
of the atmosphere. In burning summer, out in your
courtyard, there is both heat and glare, to escape which,
you have only to walk into the shelter of your room. So
too, identifying ourselves with the gunas and thus playing
in the mental and intellectual zones, we suffer the
imperfections and sorrows of an ordinary life. But when
these are transcended we shall no more be under the
tyranny of these sorrows. Finitude and agitations,
mortality and pangs, change and sorrow are not in the
Perfect, Immortal, Changeless Self.
HAVING CROSSED THE THREE 'GUNAS' OUT OF
WHICH THE BODY IS EVOLVED --- The three gunas are
the expressions of 'ignorance'or NESCIENCE, which
constitutes the very causal-body. We are experiencing the
pure causal-body in our deep-sleep, and this is nothing
other than the gunas. They emerge from the causal-body to
express themselves first as the subtle-body, expressing as
qualities of our thoughts and feeling, and again as the
gross-body to express themselves into good, bad, or
indifferent actions.
1037
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
If the art in me is to be expressed in colours, I need the
canvas and the brushes. If I am a musician, I need musical
instruments and accompaniments to express my art. Each
artist employs appropriate instruments to express himself.
A violin in the hands of a painter, and a brush with colour
and canvas in the hands of a musician are both useless
because they are not the media of expression for them. If
my thoughts are dull and animalistic, it would be sorrow
for me to bear the physical body of man. Thus, each body-
plant, animal or man --- is the exact instrument given for
the full expression of its subtle-body. And the nature and
quality of the subtle-body are determined by the texture of
the causal-body, consisting of the gunas.
It is, therefore, evident that, those who have gone beyond
the gunas, are no more under the tragedies of the subtle
and the causal-bodies.
THE EMBODIED ONE IS FREED FROM BIRTH, DEATH,
DECAY AND PAIN --- As we said earlier, the heat and
smoke are the qualities of the fire in the oven and as long
as we are near the oven, we suffer from these hardships.
Matter changes forever and these changes have been
systematised into definite stages. They are common to all
bodies everywhere. These stages are birth, growth, decay,
disease and death. These five stages are common to all.
Each one is a packet of pain; birth is painful, growth is
agonizing, decay is disturbing, disease is tyrannical and
death is terrible indeed!
1038
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
But all these sorrows are only the sorrows of Matter and
not of the Consciousness that illumines them. One, who
has realised himself to be the Awareness, transcends all
these sorrows. The Sun may illumine floods, famine, war,
pestilence, funerals, marriages and a million varieties of
happenings, and yet, none of them is IN the Sun.
Similarly, the Consciousness in us illumines the various
changes in our matter-envelopments, but they do not
appertain to the Spirit. Therefore, he who has realised
himself to be the Spirit, goes beyond all these struggles.
AND ATTAINS TO IMMORTALITY --- Not only does the
man of realisation experience the absence of sorrow but he
also lives the positive joy of perfection. This is indicated
by this phrase. In deep-sleep, a man in his sick bed forgets
his pain; the disappointed one escapes his
disappointment; the hungry no more feels his hunger; and
the sad is no longer sorrowful. But, thereby, the illness is
not cured, the disappointment is not removed, the hunger
is not satisfied, the sorrow is not mitigated. Sleep is a
temporary truce with the existing world of sorrows
within. On waking, the sorrows too return; but the State of
Bliss experienced at the moment of realisation of the Self is
not a mere temporary cessation of sorrows of life, but it is
a vivid experience of the Changeless, Infinite Nature.
Hence it is said here that one experiences the State of
Immortality even while living in this very same
embodiment.
1039
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is, indeed, a rare experience to be a God-man upon the
earth. What then are the marks of such a liberated soul, so
that we may understand him and also recognise this State
in ourselves? How will he conduct himself in society and
what exactly will be the relationship of such a Master
living the God-experience, with the world outside?
ARJUNA GETS AN OCCASION FOR ASKING THESE
QUESTIONS REGARDING THE NATURE AND
BEHAVIOUR OF SUCH A GOD-MAN:
Arjuna said: 21. What are the marks of him who has crossed
over the three GUNAS, O Lord? What is his conduct, and how
does he go beyond these three GUNAS?
The Geeta is written in a conversational style, to remove
the tedium unavoidable in the early studies of any
philosophy, and to make it more entertaining. In this
conversation between the Lord of Perfect Knowledge and
the mortal of extreme delusion, Vyasa, the poet, has
evidently not forgotten the human element in his
philosophical pre-occupation. In any Hall of Knowledge,
the questions of Arjuna sound like some childish
inquisitive-ness, the play of some intellectual pranks. The
patience with which the Lord answers all the questions of
the lesser types of intellect, clearly indicated the duties of
a true Brahmana in answering exhaustively al the
questions raised by the sceptic, nay even by the non-
believers.
1040
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Even though we are blessed by such a healthy tradition in
our literature, somehow, a cruel spirit of secrecy has come
to rob this healthy spirit from our glorious culture.
Philosophical ideas putrefy when they are not properly
ventilated. Every disciple has the full freedom to seek, first
of all, to understand properly the logic of the philosophy.
Understanding alone can give rise to a true appreciation,
and unless we appreciate an idea, we will never be able to
live it in our day-to-day life. The Hindu philosophy is a
WAY OF LIFE, and therefore, it is essentially to be lived.
Arjuna asks here three definite questions: (1) What are the
marks by which a man who has gone beyond the
influences of these three gunas can be recognised? and, (2)
what would be, in that State-of-Perfection, his relationship
with the world outside and how is his behaviour among
us who are still under the persecutions of the three gunas?
and, lastly, (3) how does such a Man-of-Perfection
conquer his inner confusions and entanglements and
attain spiritual glory?
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO ANSWER ALL THESE
QUESTIONS IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS. FIRST,
HE ENUMERATES THE CHARACTERISTIC MARKS BY
WHICH WE CAN RECOGNISE ONE WHO HAS
CROSSED THE THREE GUNAS:
1041
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 22. Light, activity, and delusion, when
present, O Pandava, he hates not, nor longs for them when
absent.
In answering the first question of Arjuna, the Lord tries to
explain how the man of right understanding does not hate
the effects of the three gunas when they are clearly present
in his inner life; nor does he long for them when they have
disappeared. Equanimity is the essence of perfection and a
Man-of-Knowledge is ever in perfect balance. He craves
for nothing, nor does he strive to acquire anything new.
To have and not to have --- both are equal to him, because
he is beyond both, living a life of inward peace which is
totally independent of all environments.
LIGHT ACTIVITY AND DELUSION, WHEN PRESENT,
HE HATES NOT --- The three terms LIGHT, ACTIVITY
and DELUSION are the effects of their respective causes,
the predominance of "Sattwa," of "Rajas" and of "Tamas."
The three gunas are indicated here by their effects. Their
presence within him, does not create in him either any
special attachment nor any particular aversion. Whether
his mind and intellect are under the influence of Rajas or
Tamas, even when he feels agitated or deluded, he is not in
the least affected by them, and therefore, he hates them
not. It is only in the absence of Self-Knowledge, that one
hates them.
He who has risen above the gunas, is unaffected when
they appear in his mind. No doubt, a man who is Sattwic
1042
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
develops an attachment for its essential peace and
serenity, its thrills and joys, and he hates when this
inward joy is disturbed by agitations (Rajas) or by dullness
(Tamas).
NOR LONGS FOR THEM WHEN ABSENT --- Not only
has he no particular attachment for them, but also, he is
not at all worried by their absence, because he has risen
much above these three gunas, and they, together or
severally, have nothing to offer him which he has not
already gained! To a millionaire, it is immaterial whether
or not he gets, by chance, a 25-paise coin on the roadside.
He may stoop down and pick it up but he would never
congratulate himself for it as much as a poor man would
do under the same circumstances.
Thus, he who has extricated himself from the
entanglements of the gunas, has transcended fully the
equipments of the mind and intellect and lives the infinite
joys of the Self. To him, the ordinary vehicles of joys and
sorrows can no more supply any special quota of
experiences. Ever steady and balanced, he lives beyond all
storms and clouds in a realm of unbroken peace and
brilliance. He conquers the world of Pure Awareness ---
attains the State of Godhood.
NOW FOLLOWS AN EXHAUSTIVE ANALYSIS AND
VIVID DESCRIPTION OF THE CONDUCT OF HIM
WHO HAS RISEN ABOVE THE 'GUNAS':
1043
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
23. He who, seated like one unconcerned, is not moved by the
'GUNAS, ' who, knowing that the 'GUNAS' operate, is self-
centred and swerves not . . .
In this section, constituted of the following three verses,
we have an exhaustive picture of the relationship that a
Man-of-Perfection maintains with the things and beings of
the world. A man's culture may be a false mask. Many of
us can act the part of God as long as the situations around
us are not too tempting. A man may not be a tyrant as
long as he has no power; he may live a quiet life, as long
as he is poor; he may be above corruption, as long as he
has no seducing chances. Thus, many good qualities
which we attribute to many people around, are all a
falsely painted, superficial beauty, concealing behind its
artifice a weak and unhealthy personality.
Potential devils stalk about in the world in the borrowed
garbs of artificial raiment. Therefore, the real test of a
Perfect One is not in the jungle or in a cave, but in the
market-place where he is teased by the mischiefs of the
world. Christ was never so great as when he was nailed to
the cross! The true nature in us will come out only when
we are crushed; the fragrance of chandana (Sandal wood)
emerges only when rubbed; Tulasi (Ocimum) leaves leave
their fragrance on the very fingers that crush them.
HE WHO, SEATED LIKE ONE UNCONCERNED, IS
NOT MOVED BY THE GUNAS --- In all his experiences in
1044
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the world, good, bad or indifferent, he is unconcerned,
since he knows that it is the play of the mind and intellect.
In a cinema hall, the tragedies and comedies on the screen
need not affect us, since we know that it is a show put up
for our entertainment. This does not mean that the Seer is
totally unconcerned with the happenings of the world.
Vyasa is very careful in his choice of expression. He says
that the Man-of-Perfection looks "LIKE ONE
UNCONCERNED." That is to say, he is not in the least
agitated; nor does he become hysterical by anything that is
happening around him in life.
WHO, KNOWING THAT THE 'GUNAS' OPERATE --- He
understands that the changes in his own inward
personality are all nothing but the kaleidoscopic changes
of the gunas and that the world outside changes according
to one's mental conditions. A man of True Wisdom lives,
ever fully aware of the technique behind the changes in
himself and in the world around him.
IS SELF-CENTERED AND SWERVES NOT --- In order to
watch the play of the three gunas in himself, he should be
an observer from beyond the gunas. Thus, established in
his Pure Spiritual Nature, he is able to observe detachedly
and enjoy the play of the gunas in himself and in the world
around him. An observer of a street fight, looking down
from his balcony, is not affected by what he observes; so
too, the Man-of-Wisdom, awakened to the Spiritual
Consciousness, swerves not from his consummate
equilibrium, when he witnesses the play of the gunas in
1045
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
himself and ever remains established in his own Divine
Nature (ava-tishthati).
CONTINUING TO ELUCIDATE THE THOUGHT
SUGGESTED IN THE PREVIOUS STANZA, THE LORD
SAYS:
24. Alike in pleasure and pain; who dwells in the Self; to whom
a clod of earth, a precious stone and gold are alike; to whom the
dear and the not-dear are the same; firm; the same in censure
and self-praise. . . .
The equanimity and balance of personality which are
observed in a Perfect Man, in the midst of the changing
vicissitudes of life, are brought out in this stanza. One
who has gone beyond the tyrannies of the three gunas
lives in a kingdom of his own, wherein neither the thrills
of Sattwa, nor the noisy clamours of Rajas, nor the
weariness of Tamas have any admission at all. Serenely
self-composed, he dwells in the Self, far away from the
sweat and agitations of base appetites, low impulses and
selfish passions.
To the average man, this state of equipoise may look like
complete death. And, no doubt, it is so; it is the death of
the limited, finite life of relative experiences, lived by the
baser ego. Spirit, conditioned by Matter, behaves like a
reed upon the tumultuous surface of an ever-agitated
mind. Always disturbed by the constant storms of love
1046
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and hate, likes and dislikes, this unhappy sense-on-
individuality suffers its shattering agitations and endless
sorrows.
To withdraw, therefore, from this chaotic field of desires
and attachments into the shelter of the Self, is to release
the diviner possibilities in ourselves. The dreamer dies to
be reborn as the waker; the individual sense of the ego
dies to release the infinite glories of the Self.
Having awakened from the dream, what would be the
waker's relationship with his dream-world, is the question
that Arjuna asks Krishna! One who has gone beyond the
shackles of the three gunas, has awakened from all the
misconceptions of the world, fed by one's 'I'-ness and 'my'-
ness. In that state of godly awakening, there cannot be any
deep and sincere relationship with the experiences of the
lower world, whether it be joy or sorrow, things dear or
not-dear, blame or praise. In all the experiences, he is a
balanced, unattached witness.
WHO DWELLS IN THE SELF (Svasthah) --- One who has
transcended the gunas that rule the tendencies of the
mind, becomes the Self, just as one who has crossed the
frontiers of a dream, discovers himself to be waker. What
would be the relationship of one who dwells in the Self,
with the things around him, and what would be his
attitude to things happening around him, is being
answered here. Established as he is in Supreme Wisdom,
the world that is contacted from the levels of the body, the
1047
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mind and the intellect does not touch him. He lives in a
world of his own, far above the plane of Matter.
ALIKE IN PLEASURE AND IN PAIN --- To come in
contact with the outside world through sense-perceptions,
to evaluate them in terms of similar experiences in the
past, and to experience pleasure or pain, is a trick of our
individual personality. The worlds of stimuli march into
us and we respond to them and these intelligent responses
can fall under two categories: pleasure and pain. That
which is pleasurable to one is bound to be painful to
another. If the things of the world were in their own
nature either pleasurable or painful, they would have
certainly caused the same uniform reactions in all of us.
It is the nature of the Sun to be hot, and therefore, the heat
of the Sun is common to us all. But the things of the world
do not produce reactions in everyone in the same way,
and therefore, it is an interpretation of our mind and
intellect, which is coloured by our own past experiences.
He who is not looking at the world through these
coloured goggles of the mind and intellect will be alike in
pleasure and pain.
REGARDING A CLOD OF EARTH, A PRECIOUS STONE
AND GOLD ALIKE --- Possession of things is another
appetite which the majority of living creatures have.
People like to possess and hoard precious-stones or gold,
but do not care for a clod of mud. But to an awakened
Man-of-Wisdom, all these possessions are one and the
1048
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
same and from his estimation none of them has any real
value.
Children collect peacock feathers, shells, marbles, broken
glass-bangles, old stamps, shapely stones, etc., from the
roadside or from waste-paper baskets, and with extreme
possessiveness, they keep them as their precious
possessions. But as they grow, without a regret, they
throw them away and the younger ones in the family
accept them with gratitude as a precious inheritance from
their elders. Similarly, a man living his ego-centric life of
desires for possessions, may value gold and precious
stones; but to the Awakened Soul, in his sense of
Infinitude, these limited possessions, hugged on to by
lesser minds, have no charm at all.
THE SAME TOWARDS THINGS DEAR AND THINGS
NOT-DEAR --- In our relationship with others, where
there is an agreeable nature, we come to love it dearly,
while, wherever there is a disagreeable nature, we hate it.
Love and hate, dear and not-dear, are all our reactions to
the agreeable and disagreeable natures of things or
situations. These reactions are, no doubt, from the levels
of the mind. One who is standing on windy shores
wearing a thick coat will not feel the cold that another
must feel, when, in his nakedness, he is dipping in the sea.
the cold waters come in contact with the skin of the naked
man and he experiences the discomforts, while the man on
the shore, comfortably warm in his coat, knows no cold.
1049
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The average man, plunged in identification with his own
mind and intellect, suffers the world and interprets it as
agreeable or disagreeable, and brings down upon himself
a lot of confusions and problems. The man of Steady
Wisdom is he, whose equilibrium is not disturbed by the
onslaught of things and circumstances of the world,
whether they be dear or not dear.
SAME IN CENSURE AND IN PRAISE --- A Man-of-
Perfection is the same in censure and praise. The
experience of a dream cannot contribute either joy or
sorrow to one who has "awakened," he might have been a
beggar insulted by the entire society in the dream-world
or might have been an adored Raja ruling a vast empire in
his dream. But when he wakes up, neither the PRAISE he
received as a Raja, nor the CENSURE he suffered as a
beggar can leave any reactions upon him. Awakened from
the "dream", the Man-of-Wisdom evaluates the blame and
praise of the world outside and finds them both utterly
insignificant.
In the above four beautiful, chosen phrases, Vyasa has
indicated some of the main conditions of life in which the
ordinary man comes to eke out his joys and sorrows.
Pleasure and pain, good and bad possessions, agreeable
and disagreeable experiences, joys and sorrows provided
by praise and censure, are some of the conditions of life by
which we get entangled in a web of agitations and
sorrows.
1050
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
MOREOVER:
25. The same in honour and dishonour; the same to friend and
foe; abandoning all undertakings --- he is said to have crossed
beyond the GUNAS.
If the above has drawn a flat picture of the Man-of-
Perfection, herein we have added strokes that shade the
outlines and give them a rounded beauty to depict them
vividly for our keener observation and closer vision.
THE SAME IN HONOUR AND DIS-HONOUR --- The
sense of equanimity in honour and dis-honour is
described here as one of the definite signs of perfection
attained. Rooted in his own lived experiences of divinity,
a man of Vision is not afraid of life and its rewards,
because, such a Perfect One looks at things and
happenings from his own special angle. The egoistic
evaluation of life tends to respect honour and shun
dishonour.
Even in ordinary life, we have found martyrs courting
what others consider as dishonour. They energetically
love and serve their generation in spite of the insults and
disgrace piled upon them by ignorant people. For
Archimedes, running along the streets naked from his
bath-tub crying "Eureka," "Eureka," might have been a
dishonour on any other day except on that day of his
discovery! Honour and dishonour are the evaluations of
1051
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the intellect that change from time to time, from place to
place. To one who has transcended the ordinary planes of
egoism and vanity, both are the same; a crown of thorns is
as welcome as a crown of roses!!
THE SAME TO FRIEND AND FOE --- To one who treads
the Path of Wisdom and has risen above the gunas, there is
no foe in the world; nor is he attached to anyone in earthy
friendships. My right hand is never a foe to me; nor is it
merely a friend; it is myself. Another, other than myself,
alone can claim enmity or friendship with me. When I
have realised the ONENESS of my spiritual nature,
Infinite and All-pervading, as the Spirit, I have no
relationship with the world outside; I live my vivid
personal experience: "THEY ARE I."
ABANDONING ALL UNDERTAKINGS --- The man of
tranquillity, living in God-consciousness, has no more ego
in him, nor is he pestered by the endless ego-centric
desires which are the sorrows of life. Desire-motivated
activities, undertaken with an anxiety to earn and to
acquire, to possess and to hoard, to aggrandise and to
claim ownership are indicated by the term "undertaking."
All these are possible only when the ego is there. When
the limited ego-sense has volatilised in the realisation of
the Infinite, all ego-motivated activities also end.
Thereafter, he, the God-inspired, works in the world as a
God-man.
1052
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HE IS SAID TO HAVE GONE BEYOND THE GUNAS ---
The above three stanzas together paint the complete
picture of one who has transcended the gunas. These three
stanzas answer Arjuna's second question.
Shankara recognises in these three stanzas "A RULE OF
CONDUCT LAID DOWN FOR THE SAMNYASIN WHO
SEEKS MOKSHA." These qualities are to be cultivated by
every SEEKER who is trying to live the Hindu-culture.
Once the seeker has gained inner freedom, these become
the characteristic features of his nature. They form the
essential marks that indicate one who has risen above the
gunas.
THE LORD PROCEEDS NEXT TO ANSWER THE
QUESTION "HOW DOES ONE TRANSCEND THE
GUNAS?"
26. And he, serving Me with unswerving devotion, and
crossing beyond the GUNAS, is fit to become BRAHMAN.
Being a practical text-book of religion, the Geeta is never
satisfied by giving mere philosophical discourses. Every
discourse, after explaining a definite aspect of our
philosophy, prescribes immediately a way of training by
which the imperfect can aspire to be and ultimately
achieve Perfection.
1053
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HE WHO SERVES ME WITH UNSWERVING
DEVOTION --- Love for God is called "devotion." Our
minds revel readily and with pleasure wherever there is
love. Our entire nature is fed by our thoughts, and, as the
thoughts, so the mind. To contemplate steadily upon the
Infinite Nature of the Self is, ultimately, to become the
Self, and thus end our limited, mortal ego.
Contemplation upon the nature of the Lord in all sincerity
and intensity cannot be maintained effectively at all times.
As we are today, we are not capable of maintaining the
mind in a state of meditation all the time. Therefore,
Krishna, knowing this weakness of man, advises a
practical method of maintaining this thought for a longer
period of time through the process of dedicated service
(seva). That all work, if intelligently undertaken in a spirit
of dedication and service, can be readily converted into a
worship, has already been explained in Chapter-III. This
clearly and evidently shows that mere devotion to the
Lord is not enough. The Gita Acharya expects his devotees
to bring religion from the Pooja-rooms and temples to the
fields of their every-day-life of activities and in all their
contacts with others around.
Such a practice of constant God-awareness and dedicated
service removes the agitations of the mind and tunes up
the inner instrument for a more efficient flight through
meditation. Tamas and Rajas get more and more reduced,
and thereby the proportion of Sattwa in the seeker's subtle
constitution increases. And such a seeker "IS FIT TO
1054
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
BECOME BRAHMAN." Such an individual who has
gained a wealth of Sattwa in his inward composition will
discover in himself a greater ability and poise during his
meditation. The re-awakening to the consciousness of the
Self cannot then
be very far off.
Here, it is said that the seeker is fit for becoming Brahman.
To realise Brahman is to become Brahman, to realise the
waker, is to become the waker.
HOW CAN THE SAGE HIMSELF BE BRAHMAN?
LISTEN:
27. For I am the Abode of BRAHMAN, the Immortal and the
Immutable, of everlasting DHARMA and of Absolute Bliss.
In describing the Yoga of Devotion and its ultimate goal,
the Geeta has already indicated: (XII-8) "YOU SHALL NO
DOUBT LIVE IN ME THEREAFTER"; and the devotee,
under the inspiration of his love, will forget himself as a
separate individual, and his mind will merge with his
point-of-contemplation, the Lord. In the previous stanza,
we were told, "HE WHO SERVES ME WITH
UNSWERVING YOGA-OF-DEVOTION", will steadily
transcend his identification with his Matter-envelopments.
To the extent the ego dies, to that extent the experience of
the Divine can manifest. To retire from waking is to enter
1055
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the hall-of-sleep; and while one is dozing, one is walking
further and further away from the realm-of-wakefulness
and proportionately entering the peaceful abode-of-sleep.
To leave completely one plane-of-Consciousness, is to
enter entirely into another plane of Consciousness. The
waker himself totally becomes the DREAMER and the
DREAMER knows no waking-state. The DREAMER ends
his dream when he either wakes up to the world or slides
into the joys of peaceful slumber. There is no transaction
across the frontiers of these distinct planes-of-
Consciousness.
FOR, I AM THE ABODE OF BRAHMAN --- The Self that
vitalises the seeker's bosom is the Pure Consciousness,
that is the same everywhere, "IMMORTAL and
IMMUTABLE, ETERNAL and BLISSFUL." To realise the
Self within, is
to realise the Infinite Self. To taste a piece of cake is to
taste all cakes of all times and for all times, because the
KNOWLEDGE OF the taste of cake is ever the same. In
the realm of experience, if a meditator apprehends the Self
in him, he at once experiences the Omnipresence of the
Self. As long as a pot exists, the pot-space is seen distinct
from the space around. Once the pot is broken, the pot-
space itself becomes the unbounded space in the Universe;
similarly, when life's false identifications with the body,
mind and intellect are broken down --- in short, when the
ego is dead, the Awareness of the Infinitude rises up to
1056
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
flood the bosom with THE ETERNAL DHARMA AND
THE UNFAILING BLISS.
Shri Shankara, in his extremely rational and analytical
commentary, gives for this stanza three alternative
interpretations, each one not contrary to the others, but
each one elucidating more and more the philosophical
contents of this verse. Shankara says "BRAHMAN IS
PARAMATMAN, IMMORTAL AND INDESTRUCTIBLE.
HE ABIDES IN ME WHO AM THE SELF (PRATYAG-
ATMAN). THAT BEING THE SELF, ONE RECOGNISES,
BY RIGHT KNOWLEDGE, THE IDENTITY OF THE SELF
IN ONESELF AND THE SELF EVERYWHERE."
Shankara gives an alternative meaning to the verse: "IT IS
THROUGH THE POWER (MAYA) INHERENT IN
BRAHMAN, AS ISHWARA, THAT HE SHOWS GRACE
TO HIS DEVOTEES. I AM THAT POWER IN
MANIFESTATION, AND THEREFORE, BRAHMAN AM
I."
Again, as another alternative interpretation, he suggests a
third meaning which, as we said earlier, is not contrary to
the former two suggestions, but, in fact, paints in greater
detail, the beauty of the stanza and its contents. "BY
BRAHMAN IS MEANT HERE THE 'CONDITIONED-
BRAHMAN'; WHO ALONE CAN BE SPOKEN OF BY
SUCH WORD AS 'BRAHMAN'... CONDITIONED-
BRAHMAN ALONE CAN BE CONCEIVED OF IN THE
FINITE INTELLECT, PERCEIVED BY THE MIND AND
1057
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
EXPRESSED THROUGH LANGUAGE AS A CONTRAST
TO MATTER. Here the term Brahman only means Spirit as
opposed in nature to inert Matter. Thus, Matter and Spirit,
both factors conceived by the limited intellect, are limited
and so finite objects of knowledge. But both are known by
the Consciousness, the Supreme. Therefore "I, THE
UNCONDITIONED AND THE UNUTTERABLE, AM
THE ABODE OF THE CONDITIONED-BRAHMAN,
WHO IS IMMORTAL AND INDESTRUCTIBLE."
The Illuminator is always different from the illumined.
The "subject" is the knower, and the "object" is the known.
Krishna, the Infinite, represents the Eternal Subject, and
therefore, He is the Abode of all "objects," including the
concept of the Self which is the Spirit that vitalises and
gives a similitude of sentiency and appearance of activity
to all the Matter-envelopments. The conditioned Brahman
(sa-upadhika) rests upon the Consciousness that is aware of
it, which is the Unconditioned (nir-upadhika) Brahman.
In the following chapter (XV-16, 17 and 18) it will be
explained as the three Atmans: Anatman, Jivatman and
Paramatman.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-
Geeta, in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of
YOGA , in the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the
fourteenth discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF GUNAS
Om Om Om Om Om
1058
