Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 18
Moksha Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Liberation Through Renunciation
Arjuna said: 1. I desire to know severally, O mighty-armed, the
essence or truth of "Renunciation, " O Hrishikesa, as also of
'Abandonment, ' O slayer of Keshi (Krishna) .
The chapter begins with Arjuna's question, demanding of
Lord Krishna a precise definition, and an exhaustive
explanation, of the two terms used by the Lord in the
Geeta, off and on, here and there. 'Renunciation' (Sanyasa)
and 'Abandonment' (Tyaga) are the two technical terms
used more than once in the Geeta. Though the question is
asked in a spirit of academic interest, Krishna takes up the
question in all seriousness. When a disciple expresses his
doubt, he invariably fails to express his exact difficulty.
However, it is the duty of the teacher to discover the
difficulty of the student and clear his doubt, as even the
Lord of the Geeta does here.
The logic of the entire chapter revolves around the
meanings of 'Renunciation' and 'Abandonment.' Samnyasa
without the spirit of Tyaga is incomprehensible, and if at
all it is ever so practised, it can only be a sham pose. The
bulk of the chapter maps out the tendencies, urges,
impulses and motives, that are to be abandoned, so that
1194
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
true 'Abandonment' of the undivine personality can
effectively take place. We must read the chapter in this
spirit, or else it will surely fail to influence us.
SLAYER OF KESHI (Keshi-nishudana) --- Keshi was a
Daitya who attacked Krishna in the form of a horse.
Krishna killed him by tearing him into two halves.
DEFINING THESE TERMS AND INDICATING THE
ENTIRE SIGNIFICANCE OF THEIR CONNOTATIONS,
KRISHNA SAYS:
The Blessed Lord said: 2. The Sages understand SAMNYASA
to be "the renunciation of works with desire" ; the wise declare
"the abandonment of the fruits of all actions" as TYAAGA.
"Totally giving up all desire-prompted activities" is
RENUNCIATION, and ABANDONMENT is "giving up of
all anxieties for enjoying the fruits-of-action." As they
stand, both of them read almost the same to the
uninitiated; for, all desires are always for the fruits of our
actions. Thus, "renouncing desire-motivated activity" and
"renouncing our anxiety for the fruit" would read the
same for those who see only their superficial suggestions.
No doubt, both mean giving up desire, but Tyaga is
slightly different from Samnyasa; and yet, "abandonment"
has an integral relationship with "renunciation." Action is
an effort put forth in the present, which, in its own time,
1195
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
will, it is hoped, fulfil itself into the desired fruit. And, the
fruit is what we reap later on as a result of the present
action. A desireless action, therefore, belongs to the
PRESENT, while the anxiety to enjoy the fruit (desire) is a
disturbance of our mind regarding a FUTURE period of
time. The fruit comes after the action; the fruit is the
culmination of an action undertaken in the present.
Desire and agitation bring about restlessness, and the
deeper the desire, the greater is the amount of dissipation
of our energies within. A dissipated man cannot execute
any piece of work with steady efficiency and true ardour.
Also, it is to be noticed, desire is always ordered by the
ego. Elimination of the ego is at once the sublimation of
the individuality and the ascension of the individual from
the lower realms of consciousness to the upper-most
stratum of the effulgent universal Awareness, the One
Eternal God.
The tragedy of life becomes complete if a desire-ridden
individual comes under the endless persecution of steady
anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions. Fruits-of-actions
belong to the FUTURE and they are always ordered by
the quality and quantity of the action in the PRESENT
moment, and also by the circumstances available in the
chosen field of activity. Naturally, without the
"Abandonment" (Tyaga) of our clinging attachment to the
expected FRUITS OF OUR ACTIONS, we will not
discover the full potentialities of our own personality.
1196
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Without this, our activities will naturally become
ineffective, and ineffective activities can never provide for
us enjoyable fruits.
In short, "Renunciation" is the goal to be reached through
the process of "Abandonment" of our moment-to-moment
anxiety to enjoy the fruits. "Abandonment" (Tyaaga) is the
means to reach the goal of "Renunciation" (Samnyasa).
Both Samnyasa and Tyaaga are disciplines in our activities.
Krishna is never tired of emphasising the importance of
work. Neither of these terms indicates that work should
be ignored; on the other hand both of them insist that
WORK WE MUST. Work, however, can gain a total
transmutation by the removal of the things that clog our
efficiency, and thus every piece of work can be made to
yield its fullest reward. Snapping the chains that shackle
us with the past and the future, and working without
being hustled by anxieties or henpecked by desires, in the
full freedom and inspiration of the present, is the noblest
way to perform actions. To a large extent, we can say that
the definition of these two terms in the Geeta is more
broad-minded and tolerant than the implications of these
two words as we read in the Vedic lore.
SHOULD THE 'IGNORANT' PERFORM WORK OR
NOT?
1197
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
3. That all actions should be abandoned as evil, declare some
philosophers; while others (declare) that acts of sacrifice, gift and
austerity should not be relinquished.
In the previous stanza it was conclusively declared that
ABANDONMENT is the "way" and total
RENUNCIATION is the "goal." On this theory of
abandonment there is a school of philosophers, the
Sankhyas, who declare: "ACTION SHOULD BE
ABANDONED AS EVIL." According to them, all actions
are productive of vasanas which cloud the realisation of
the Self; and therefore, without exception, all actions
should be renounced. Some commentators upon the
Sankhyan philosophy point out that "WORK IS NOT TO
BE ABANDONED, EXCEPT WHEN IT IS GOING IN
WRONG CHANNELS, MOTIVATED BY DEMONIAC
URGES LIKE PASSION, GREED, DESIRE ETC."
The philosophers not only indicate that all seekers should
avoid unhealthy activities which have, in their reactions, a
deadening influence upon the spiritual beauty in man, but
also advise that every man should engage himself in
creative, character-moulding, moral-rebuilding work that
can aid the individual's personality-integration. This latter
school of thinkers recommends that 'sacrifice' (Yajna),
'charity' (Daana) and 'austerity' (Tapas) should never be
abandoned.
As students of the Geeta, we should know that Krishna
wants Arjuna only to renounce all evil activities, and
1198
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perform worldly work in a spirit of dedicated, selfless
devotion. Krishna's Geeta calls upon man to make work
itself the greatest homage unto the Supreme; this is
SPIRITUAL 'Sadhana.'
THE LORD'S DECREE IS THAT THE 'IGNORANT'
SHOULD PERFORM WORK. NOW, AS TO THESE
DIVERGENT VIEWS:
4. Hear from Me the conclusion or the final truth, about this
"abandonment, " O best of the Bharatas; "abandonment, "
verily, O best of men, has been declared to be of three kinds.
Lord Krishna is now promising Arjuna that he will
scientifically explain what constitutes Tyaaga and under
what headings this spirit of 'abandonment' can be
considered.
For a mortal mind, GIVING UP is no easy task; acquisition
and aggrandisement are the very life-breath of man's
mind. Naturally therefore, Krishna has to invoke the best
in Arjuna by addressing him as the "best among Bharatas"
(Bharata-Sattama) and as a "tiger among men" (Purusha-
Vyaaghra).
"Abandonment" (Tyaaga), for purposes of study and
understanding, is three-fold. All through the Geeta this
three-fold classification is followed, and everywhere we
1199
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
find that it is classed as the 'pure' (Sattwic), the 'passionate'
(Rajasic) and the 'dull' (Tamasic).
WHAT THEN IS THE FINAL DECREE? THE LORD
SAYS:
5. Acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity should not be
abandoned, but should be performed; worship, charity, and also
austerity, are the purifiers of even the 'wise. '
What has been said earlier has been accepted and
emphasised. Practice of worship (Yajna), charity (Daana),
and austerity (Tapas) should not be abandoned. We have
already found, in the previous chapter, that these, when
properly pursued, bring about a brilliant discipline within
and create conditions under which alone, the highest
spiritual unfoldment and the final experience of the
Infinite are possible. Krishna says here that these can
"purify even thoughtful men." Men of evolutionary
tendencies, who seek freedom from their personality-
obsessions must, with devotion and the right attitude of
mind, perform Yajnas, Daana and Tapas. Thereby they can
discover an endless amount of inner peace and balance.
OBLIGATORY WORKS SHOULD BE PERFORMED
WITHOUT ATTACHMENT:
1200
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
6. But even these actions should be performed leaving aside
attachment and the fruits, O Partha; this is my certain and best
belief.
Even these actions, namely, 'Sacrifice' (Yajna), 'Charity'
(Daana) and 'Austerity' (Tapas) should be performed
"LEAVING ATTACHMENTS AND FRUITS." The term
"attachment" in the Geeta has a peculiar flavour, and
throughout, this term has been used to indicate the spirit
in which an ego-centric personality will come to work in
any field of activity, while fulfilling its own ego-centric
desires. Thus, an ego and its desires are the component
parts of attachments. When an ego strives to fulfil its own
burning desires, it comes to live in a certain relationship
with the world of things and objects around --- this wrong
relationship is called "ATTACHMENT."
Once an individual starts working under the poison of
"attachment," he comes to entertain an unintelligent, self-
destructive anxiety to gain and enjoy the results of his
actions. Long before the actions are completed, one's hope
and hunger for their fruits can present themselves to
weave a charm of their own, benumbing one's efficiency
in the field of the action undertaken.
The idea that CHARITY, SACRIFICE and AUSTERITY
must be performed in an attitude of "detachment,"
"renouncing all anxieties for the enjoyment of the fruits" is,
Krishna admits, his own personal opinion (matam). It is
not, however, purely an original Krishna-creed, but is
1201
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perfectly in line with the technique of selfless action as
advised in all the Hindu scriptures.
To be rid of attachment and to be free from anxieties
regarding the fruits that are yet to present themselves as a
reward for the work undertaken in the present, are the
main limbs of the Krishna-creed in the Geeta. To live this
Krishna-way-of-action is to assure for ourselves a healthy
inner equipment, which can tenderly guide us to the
peaks of Supermanhood. The loving term used here by
Krishna in addressing Arjuna has its own appeal to the
Prince. It recommends to him the Krishna-theory of
"abandonment" (Tyaaga) as explained in this stanza.
THEREFORE, FOR A SEEKER OF SPIRITUAL
LIBERATION, WORK IS UNAVOIDABLE; AND WITH A
PROPER SPIRIT OF 'TYAGA', WORK CAN HELP HIM
ON HIS PATH. THE 'TAMSIC TYAAGA' IS:
7. Verily, the renunciation of "obligatory actions" is not proper;
the abandonment of the same from delusion is declared to be
TAMASIC (dull) .
Abandonment of obligatory duties is considered by the
Lord as the lowest and the darkest. Every individual has
his own obligations to himself and to others in society.
They include both the unavoidable DAILY DUTIES, as
well as the SPECIAL DUTIES that arise on special
occasions in the life of an individual, and in the society of
1202
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the times. Therefore, as long as an individual is a member
of the society, enjoying the social life, and demanding
protection and profit from the society, he has no right,
according to the Hindu code-of-living, to abandon his
"obligatory duties."
Even if one abandons one's moral duties in ignorance, one
is not excused; for, as in the civil laws of the modern
world and in the physical laws of the phenomenal world,
so in the spiritual kingdom also, "ignorance of the law is
no excuse." Out of ignorance and lack of proper thinking,
if an individual ignores his obligations and refuses to
serve the world he is living in, that 'abandonment' is
considered as 'dull' (Tamasic).
THE RAJASIC TYAAGA IS:
8. He who, from fear of bodily trouble, abandons action because
it is painful, thus performing a RAJASIC (passionate)
abandonment, obtains not the fruit of "abandonment. "
Someone may come to give up his individual obligatory
duties "BECAUSE THEY ARE PAINFUL" or "THROUGH
FEAR OF BODILY SUFFERING." The 'relinquishment'
thus practised falls under the "passionate" type (Rajasic).
This clearly shows in its unsaid suggestions that a man of
action and passion (Rajas) will readily undertake to act
and fulfil his obligatory duties if they are not painful, and
are not too fatiguing. To become a man of action, fulfilling
1203
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
all obligations and performing all duties without
sacrificing one's own personal comforts, is no heroic life at
all. Such actions have no special reward. In fact, Krishna
says: "HE SHALL ATTAIN NO FRUIT WHATSOEVER
OF HIS ABANDONMENT."
Performance of one's obligatory duties is itself the most
glorious of all forms of "Tyaaga," and it can be considered
doubly so, when it involves a certain amount of sacrifice
of one's own personal convenience and bodily comfort.
Arjuna himself was hesitating to fight the battle which
was his obligatory duty. Arjuna's 'relinguishment' of this
duty could be considered as falling under this category of
Rajasic Tyaaga.
Real abandonment should always lead us on to the ampler
fields of self-expression, push us into the fuller ways of
living, and introduce us to the greater experiences of joy.
A bud ABANDONS itself to become a flower, the flower
GIVES UP its soft petals and its enchanting fragrance and
gains for itself the richer status of a fruit. Every real
ABANDONMENT should haul us up into a nobler status
of fulfilment.
WHAT THEN IS THE SATTWIC ABANDONMENT?
9. Whatever "obligatory action" is done, O Arjuna, merely
because it ought to be done, abandoning "attachment and also
fruit, " that abandonment is regarded as SATTWIC (pure) .
1204
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Those who execute thoroughly all their obligatory duties
"because they are to be done" (karyam iti), because to
remain without accomplishing them is almost death to
them --- fall under the Sattwic (pure) variety. They believe
that certain acts of 'relinquishment' MUST be done, for
otherwise, according to them, it is just insufferably
indecent. When such persons, under these inspiring ideas,
come to serve the community, or work in any field, they
provide us with examples of the Sattwic type of
'relinquishment.'
Activities have certain unavoidable encumbrances. All
that the Lord says in the Geeta amounts only to this; that
we must act on without these encumbrances curtailing
and limiting our freedom of action. Thus, the tyaga of the
good (Sattwic), or real tyaga, means doing actions with the
correct mental attitude." This may seem strange, but those
who have carefully gone through these three stanzas
explaining the true type of tyaga, must have understood
that all these discussions were not so much on what is to
be 'relinquished' but as to HOW we must 'abandon,' and
in WHICH FIELD we must act. In short, Lord Krishna's
concept of Tyaga condemns abandonment of the world
and our duties in it. To the Lord in the Geeta, tyaga is a
subjective renunciation of all inner selfishness and desire,
which limit the freedom of the individual in his field-of-
activity. It is something like the abandonment that
everyone practises in his dining-room; renunciation of
hunger by positively taking the food!
1205
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In these three stanzas the abandonment (Tyaga) discussed
is not "the ABANDONMENT of actions" but
"ABANDONMENT of such things within our subjective
personality that block the free flow of our own
possibilities." Tyaga makes an active man a more potential
worker in the world.
Acting in the world outside, renouncing both the ego and
the ego-centric desires, an individual comes to exhaust his
vasanas, and grows in his inward purity.
HOW DOES SUCH A PURE MAN, PURIFIED
THROUGH 'SATTWIC TYAGA,' GAIN THE HIGHEST
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE?
10. The abandoner, soaked in purity, being intelligent, with all
his doubts cut asunder, hates not disagreeable action, nor is he
attached to an agreeable action.
The previous stanza would, at the outset, look as an
impossible thesis to any strong man of action and
adventure. Perhaps the royal heart of Arjuna could not
comprehend such a person who fulfils his obligatory duty
"only because it ought to be done" (karyamiti)" renouncing
attachment and fruit." As though answering the look of
surprise on Arjuna's face, which faithfully registers his
failure to appreciate the idea, Krishna gives in this stanza
a more elaborate picture of such an individual.
1206
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A man established in Sattwic abandonment never hates,
nor does he ever feel attached. He is not miserable in
disagreeable environments nor does he get attached to the
circumstances and schemes-of-things which are agreeable
to his taste. He does his duties under all circumstances
agreeable or disagreeable, without feeling elated when he
finds himself on the "peaks," or feeling dejected when he
discovers himself in the "pits" of life.
He is overwhelmed neither by extreme joy, nor by
extreme sorrow; equanimity becomes his essential nature.
He stands as a rock, ever at ease, and watches with an
unbroken balance-of-vision, the waves of happenings
rising and falling all around him at all times. He is, in
short, independent of the happenings in the outer world
around him.
When, to such a man of Sattwic Tyaga, impulses such as
jealousy, anger, passion, greed etc., come, he does not get
involved in those impulses, as we do in our attachments
and identifications with them. That is, a man of
abandonment (tyaga) readily discovers in himself a secret
faculty to abandon his identification with the false, the
lower instincts in himself. He does not become a victim of
his own mental impressions (vasanas); he stands ever free
and surely apart from the tumults of his mind.
Such a man is said to be an educated and cultured man.
An uncultured man is like a dry leaf that is tossed hither
and thither by every passing breeze; is like a reed upon
1207
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the bosom of the sea, rising and falling in the mad revelry
of the tireless waves. It is the privilege of the animal alone
to get faithfully coloured by its own instincts and act
according to the dictates of its impulses. It is only man, the
inheritor of an intellect, who can enquire into the nature of
the rising waves of impulses, judge them in the light of the
ideal he holds onto in himself, and, if need be, stand apart
from them and allow them to die away.
But ordinarily, an individual finds it impossible to stand
apart and live, to act independently of his impulses.
According to the Geeta, this is because man has allowed
his faculty of 'abandonment' (Tyaga) to die away. A Tyagi
is he who has cultivated this habit to live intelligently in
life, practising from moment to moment the
'abandonment' of all the animal whisperings in himself,
and following diligently the Melody of the Soul. Such a
man is established in Sattwic Tyaga.
In order that one may come to judge correctly and
renounce the false, one must have a very clear and steady
picture of the Perfect in oneself. Medha-shakti is not merely
the intellect's power of understanding or reasoning, but it
is also the intellect's FACULTY TO MEMORISE AND
RETAIN THINGS. A cultured man of unbroken equipoise
and steady understanding must have a constant memory
of: (1) the constituents of the field of his activity, (2) the
instruments through which he contacts the world outside,
(3) his own essential infinitely divine nature, and (4) his
exact relationship with the world-of-objects when he is
1208
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
contacting it through his senses. Such a person is called
Medhaavee, "A MAN OF FIRM UNDERSTANDING." And
in case his knowledge be spotted with patches of doubts
or slightly poisoned by traces of false knowledge, there
will be in him endless confusions, which in their turn will
bring about wrong judgements. Therefore, Krishna
indicates that a man of Sattwic Tyaaga is one whose
"DOUBT IS CLEFT."
The highest type of Tyaga is not, perhaps, abundantly
found except in a minority who have accomplished their
detachments from all their matter vestures completely.
But to the majority, identification with the body-mind-
intellect equipment is so natural that they have the SENSE
OF AGENCY and come to live in the world, conditioned
by the happenings around.
SUCH AN AVERAGE MAN, WHO WORKS WITH AN
EGO AND ATTACHMENT, MUST LEARN TO WORK,
AT LEAST RENOUNCING THE FRUIT. KRISHNA
EXPLAINS:
11. Verily, it is not possible for an embodied being to abandon
actions entirely, but he who relinquishes "the fruits of actions"
is verily called a 'relinquisher' (TYAAGI) .
Actions we will have to perform. Without action no living
organism can continue living. Existence itself is the
manifestation of life's activities. To remain without doing
1209
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
anything is itself an action, and the physiological and
psychological actions continue upto the grave. Anything
that has a body, even a unicellular organism, can never
hope to abandon ALL activities. Actions are the insignia of
life. It is the fragrance in the flower-of-existence. Where
there is no action, there life has ended; there existence has
withered away --- the substance has dried up... stinking
death has come.
Since all of us are embodied, and therefore, cannot
abandon all activities as long as we live, the only choice
left to us is to direct and discipline all our actions in such a
way as to bring a harmony into our inner life and a
dynamic rhythm into our outer duties.
If Tyaga of the Sattwic type is not possible for all of us due
to our attachments to the world of matter, certainly we
can practise the 'abandonment' of at least our clinging
attachments and anxieties for the fruits of our actions.
Action cannot be completely abandoned by one who is
conditioned by the gross, subtle and causal bodies. Such
an individual --- and most of us at this stage of our
evolution fall under this category --- is advised by Krishna
to abandon his anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions
which are yet to come in a future period of time and act
diligently, entirely, and enthusiastically in the present. A
man who thus abandons the thirst to enjoy the fruits of his
action is called a tyagi.
1210
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
NOW WHAT IS THE BENEFIT WHICH COMES FROM
'TYAAGA'? THE LORD ANSWERS:
12. The threefold fruit of action, evil, good and mixed-accrues,
after death, only to those who have no spirit of 'abandonment' ;
never to total relinquishers.
The results of all actions depend, it is said, upon the
quality of the actions. Abandonment (tyaga) has already
been described as belonging to three different categories.
Here we have a discussion of the different types of
reactions that would accrue when the different types of
tyaga are practised.
Projection of a wilful desire in the world outside is an
action, and according to the purity of the motive and the
serenity of composure of the actor, a psychological
reaction is left behind at the end of every activity. The
mind has an instinctive habit of repeating itself. Future
thoughts faithfully follow the foot-prints left by the past
thoughts. Thus, actions in the world determine the
"thought tendencies" of the human mind, and these
tendencies (vasanas) condition the mental equipment and
order our reactions to the things that are happening
around.
The fruit-of-action, in philosophy, is not only its
manifested results in the material world, but also the
1211
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
subtle constitutional changes it leaves in the thought-
personality of man.
The total reactions gained by the mind's working in the
world, according to Lord Krishna, fall under three distinct
types: (1) the disagreeable or the calamitous --- meaning
those that are positively bad; (2) agreeable or non-
calamitous --- meaning positively good; (3) the mixed type
of balanced or average --- wherein the tendencies are
balanced equally between the good and the bad.
In the constant flow of time, the PRESENT determines the
immediate FUTURE, and therefore, these tendencies, in
their different textures, must necessarily determine our
reactions to our environments in the IMMEDIATE future.
If we extend this theory to the very last moment of our
days in this embodiment, it becomes amply evident that,
after the departure from here through death, our next
embodiment and the general type of environment that we
will find ourselves in, would be determined by the type of
tendencies produced by our actions. This is what is called
the "reincarnation theory" in the Sanatana Dharma.
If the vasanas are good (Sattwic), then a joyous field of
prosperity and happiness would be the only realm
wherein such a mind would discover its destiny. Those
who are entertaining and deliberately cultivating the low
animal-vasanas in themselves will find for themselves a
complete fulfilment only by appearing in the lower strata
of life. When the 'tendencies' for good and bad are almost
1212
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
equal (mishram), then we enter into this world-of-action ---
the world in which we are now living --- the world of the
intelligent man. No doubt, in each of us there is a call of
the "higher" constantly leading us towards an
undetermined and indeterminable ideal, but there are also
the barkings and the brayings, the hissings and the roars,
of the "lower" in us, constantly confusing and
systematically distracting our vision of the ideal.
If an individual were to identify himself with the higher
and live up to the ideal as best as he can, the "higher"
vasanas will multiply and ultimately silence the "lower"
completely. If, one the other hand, as is the fashion in the
modern world, we allow ourselves to be tempted by the
"lower" and identify with the animal-impulses in us, they
will multiply and make us a caricature of the Divine that
we really are. In short, in the tug-of-war between the
'higher' and the 'lower,' the determining factor is the
individual's own personality.
Both these vasanas grow, be they good or bad, and in
either case, there is still a manifestation as birth in the
realm of pangs and perils. The transcendence of the
experiencer --- personality is possible only when the
conditionings have totally ended and the vasanas are
rendered powerless to hold the Pure Spirit, seemingly, at
ransom.
To explain further the difference between 'abandonment'
(Tyaaga) and 'renunciation' (Samnyasa), the Lord says here
1213
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that for a man-of-renunciation there is no reaction either
to the actions done in the PAST or to actions undertaken
by him in the PRESENT.
This idea clearly brings out the subtle difference that the
Geeta makes between Tyaaga and Sanyasa. Earlier we
found that tyaaga is that capacity in us with which, from
moment to moment, we withdraw ourselves from the
impulses of our mind; while Samnyasa is the total
renunciation of the entire "tendencies," both good and bad
--- from their crystallisation as the "ego."
The Geeta-technique for the rehabilitation of man's
personality, so beautifully elaborated and exhaustively
discussed, when briefly put would be: (a) the seeker first
gets detached from the lower sensuous cravings and
passions by identifying himself with the nobler ideals of
self-control and moral-perfection; (b) a mind so
conditioned becomes tamer than a mind goaded by
sensuality. This purified mind develops in itself the
required amount of subtle powers of thinking, of
consistent self-application and of steady contemplation;
(c) on realising the Pure 'Be'-ness, all becomings end. To
the pure Self there is no becoming; the "tendencies" of the
mind (vasanas) cannot shackle the Spirit. Its subtle
Presence cannot but be ever Immaculate and
Unconditioned.
The "pleasant," the "unpleasant" and the "mixed" types of
reaction (Karma Phala) reach only those who have an ego-
1214
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
centric sense of identification with the actions as well as
their resultant reactions. Those who abandon (tyaagee)
both the sense of ego and the anxiety for the action-results
are not caught in the clutches of 'reactions'-actions.
Memories of the past are the fertile fields where desires
are cultivated and it is only in the future that the fruits are
borne by the trees of actions. Renouncing our indulgence
with the inheritance of the past and leaving all our
anxieties for the future, to serve the world as a service to
the Lord is abandonment --- tyaaga.
AFTER THUS HANDLING THE THEME OF
'ABANDONMENT' IN GENERAL, KRISHNA NOW
TAKES UP A CLOSER EXAMINATION OF IT,
DISSECTING THE VERY COMPONENT PARTS THAT
CONSTITUTE WORK:
13. Learn from Me, O mighty-armed, these five causes for the
accomplishment of all actions, as declared in the SANKHYA
(UPANISHAD) system, which is the end of all actions.
When Arjuna was thus told conclusively that action could
be performed without ego-centric desires and clinging
attachment to the fruits, as an intelligent enquirer, he had
every right to ask: "What constitutes an action?" To lay
bare the inner essence of action, Krishna analyses the
anatomy of work --- the external structure of action, and
the physiology of action --- the inner inspirations, motives
and urges in work.
1215
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Addressing Arjuna as mighty-armed, Krishna declares
that, for the real accomplishment, fulfilment or
achievement of an action, five aspects of action are
necessarily to be disciplined and marshalled. These five
are the "limbs of action" without which no action is ever
possible. When these five aspects work in happy co-
ordination, the undertaking is assured of the greatest
success, be it secular or sacred, material or spiritual. The
term "Mighty-armed" is used to invoke the adventurous
heroism in Arjuna, for, a large share of daring courage,
consistency of purpose, faith in oneself and intellectual
heroism are necessary, if one is to discipline one's actions
and successfully accomplish a thorough cultural
development within.
In this stanza, the Geetaacharya confesses that this
enumeration of the aspects that constitute an action is not
his own original contribution, but it is exactly what is said
in the Saankhyan philosophy. The Saankhyan philosophy as
a separate text no longer exists... perhaps, here, the word
Saankhyan indicates only the Upanishads. The existing
Saankhyan books do not mention these five-fold categories.
It is reasonable to suppose that at the time of Vyasa there
might have been some books discussing this topic which
are now lost to us. However, one thing is clear: that this
five-fold division, which the Lord discusses in the
following stanzas, faithfully follows the philosophy of the
Geeta as discussed so far. The Geeta has declared that all
actions cease when the knowledge of the Self dawns, so
1216
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that the Advaita commentator concludes: "Vedanta, which
imparts to us knowledge, is THE END OF ACTIONS."
HEREIN THE LORD ENUMERATES FIVE FACTORS
WHICH ARE THE CONSTITUENT PARTS IN ALL
ACTIONS:
14. The "seat" (body) , the doer (ego) , the various organs-of-
perception, the different functions of various organs-of-action,
and also the presiding deity, the fifth.
The promise made in the previous stanza is being fulfilled
herein and Lord Krishna enumerates the five component
parts that go into the constitution of any "action." We have
already discussed that the enumeration as it stands today
in this stanza does not correspond to the Saankhyan
declaration. Commentators interpret these terms, each
slightly differently from the others, and this five-fold
division being rather obscure, the various explanations of
the commentators are not very helpful to a practical
student. However, we can see in these five terms the
twenty-four fold division of Prakriti, which the Saankhyans
hold and follow.
Every work is undertaken with the help of the "body"
(Adhishthaanam), for the body is the gateway for the
stimuli to enter as well as for the responses to exist. A
body in itself can neither receive the world nor react to it
unless there is the "ego" (Kartaa) functioning in and
1217
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
through it. There must be an intelligent personality,
presiding over its own desires, wanting to fulfil them and
thus constantly seeking a fulfilment through its body
activities. The ego sets the body in continuous activity.
When an ego, thus riddled with its own desires, wants to
seek its fulfilment in the world of objects outside, it
certainly needs "instruments" (Karanam) of perception.
Without these, the inner personality cannot come to
contact the field of enjoyment and find satisfaction in it.
The term "function" (Cheshtaa) here has been commented
upon by Shankara as the physiological activities, known
as Praana, Apaana, etc. No doubt it is sufficiently
explanatory to all students who have a knowledge of the
traditions in Vedantic thought. But to a lay student this
explanation might be rather confusing. As a result of the
physiological activities (Praana, Apaana etc.) the health of
the body gets toned up and it must flow out in its own
vigour and enthusiasm through the organs-of-action.
Thus, for our understanding of these enumerations, we
can directly take the term "function" (Cheshtaa) used here
as indicating the organs-of-action.
The organs-of-perception are presided over by the five
great elements. These presiding deities are technically
called Devas, and they indicate particular functions and
faculties in the sense-organs, such as the "power of vision"
of the eye, the "power of audition" in the ears etc. i. e., the
sense-organs must have their full vigour and must
1218
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
function properly in order to play their part in any field of
work.
Stripping off all these details of explanations, if we re-read
the stanza, it merely enumerates the constituent parts of
every action. They are: (1) the body, (2) the ego, (3) the
organs-of-perception, (4) the organs-of-action and, (5) the
five elemental forces. The stanza is dedicated merely to
enumerating these five aspects without which no ego-
centric activity is ever possible.
HOW CAN THESE FIVE BECOME THE COMPONENT
PARTS IN EVERY HUMAN ACTIVITY?
15. Whatever action a man performs by his body, speech and
mind --- whether right, or the reverse --- these five are its
causes.
The items listed above must all come into full play in
order to accomplish any work, and therefore, these five
component parts are called the causes of all actions. To
show that there is no exception, the Lord says that
whatever action a man might undertake, be it by his body,
speech or mind, and that too whether right or wrong, in
every expression of action there is the play of all these five
essential parts.
These five constitute the equipment of action, and the
Spirit, the eternally Actionless, conditioned by the
1219
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellectual desires, behaves AS THOUGH it is an ego
(Jiva); and this individualised personality, forgetting its
own State-of-Perfection demanding satisfaction through
sense gratifications, making use of the faculties of sense-
enjoyment, strives in the world-of-objects to achieve, to
gain, to aggrandise. Here we should not forget, in our
haste, to grasp clearly that the five-fold division is the
description of the "engine under the bonnet" and not of
the "petrol;" and yet, "petrol" in itself cannot make the
travel pleasant and successful --- nor can the "engine"
move without the "petrol."
A motor vehicle becomes an automobile only when
"petrol" plays through the "engine," and when the driver
can, by his faculties, take the vehicle to its destination,
which is determined by the demand or the desire of the
owner of the vehicle. If this analogy is understood, we can
correctly evaluate this portion of Krishna's enumeration,
and can truly appreciate what the Lord means when he
says "these five are the causes" of all work.
ALL THESE ENUMERATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS
OF THE LAST TWO STANZAS ADD UP TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT THE 'SENSE-OF-AGENCY' OF
THE SELF IS AN ILLUSION:
16. Now, such being the case, verily he who --- owing to his
untrained understanding --- looks upon his Self, which is
1220
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"alone" (never conditioned by the "engine" ) , as the doer, he, of
perverted intelligence, sees not.
In the previous stanzas we found that action belongs to
the realm of matter, no doubt IN THE PRESENCE of the
Spirit. Failing to discriminate thus between the
equipments of action and the actionless Spirit, which, in
an unhealthy combination between them, comes to
manifest as the "actor" (doer), the poor ego-centric
personality so born comes to pant and sigh at its own
disappointments and failures, or dances and jumps at its
own joys and successes. The moment an individual
becomes aware of these inner mechanisms and their play,
the delusory ego-centric individuality ends as it becomes a
mere myth of the mind, a delusory phantom of a
midsummer, mid-day dream.
THIS BEING THE CASE (Tatra evam sati) --- In all such
actions, whether good or bad, as undertaken by the body,
speech or mind, the essential component parts are the
body, ego, organs-of-perception, organs-of-action and the
elements; thus all actions belong to matter. But the Spirit,
which is the essential nature, in identifying Itself with the
matter-vestures, comes to live through the disturbing
destinies as the ever-changing man. All pangs and joys, all
failures and successes, all imperfections and impediments,
belong to the ego, which is the Spirit considering Itself as
conditioned by these components of action. The Supreme
Pure Self (Kevalam Aatmaanam) is misunderstood by the
ordinary man to be the actor (Kartaaram), and in the
1221
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
consequent ego-sense, the divinity is forgotten and the
individual comes to despair. The causes of this
misunderstanding have been indicated here. Untempered
reason (Akrita Buddhi) and perverted mind (Durmati) are
the maladjustments in an individual, because of which,
right recognition of one's own divinity is not constantly
maintained within. The implication of the statement is
that, if a seeker can integrate himself --- through the
process of disciplining his reasoning faculty and guiding
his mind away from his intellectual perversities --- that
individual will come to experience within himself that it is
only the five-fold components made up of matter that are
indulging in the agitations of the outer activity.
ELUCIDATING THE FOREGOING IDEAS MORE
VIVIDLY, THE LORD CONTINUES:
17. He who is free from the egoistic notion, whose intelligence is
not tainted (by good or evil) , though he slays these people, he
slays not, nor is he bound (by the action) .
So far we have been told that the realm-of-matter is the
field of all activity, and the weeds of sorrows and
agitations can grow only therein. The Spirit, the farmer,
has an existence independent of this field and yet the
farmer, in his identification with the self-projections on the
field, feels happy or unhappy according to the condition
of the field at any given moment.
1222
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, it is our unhealthy contact created by our self-
projections on to the matter-envelopments around us that
has given rise to the 'ego', which in its turn comes to suffer
the buffetings of life. Therefore, Krishna says that "HE
WHO IS FREE FROM THE SENSE OF EGOISM" and
whose "INTELLIGENCE IS NOT TAINTED" by false
values of possession, acquisition, aggrandisement, etc.,
does no action even though activities take place all around
and even through him; "THOUGH HE SLAYS THESE
PEOPLE, HE SLAYS NOT."
This does not mean that a man-of-Wisdom, who has
withdrawn from his false evaluation of matter, will no
longer act in the world. He will not remain like a stone
statue. The statement only means, that even while he is
acting in the world, to him it is all a self-entertaining
game. It is always our ego-centric clinging that leaves
impressions (vasanas) in our mind and thus actions of the
past come to goad us on to more and more activities. A
man-of-Perfection who has the necessary discriminative
intellect, learns to detach himself and act, and therefore, in
him the footprints of the past activities cannot beat out
any deepening footpath.
Krishna says: "THOUGH HE KILLS, HE KILLS NOT;
NOR IS HE BOUND." If we were to compare the results of
the lusty, passionate acts of some self-seeking murderer,
with the honourable heroic activities of some devotedly
dedicated warrior championing the cause of his country's
freedom and independence, we shall easily understand
1223
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the above assertion of the Lord. The murderer develops
vasanas, and propelled by his tendencies, he again and
again commits heinous crimes and disturbs the society,
while the hero on the battle-front, though he too kills
many, returns from the battle-front as a more educated,
noble, and refined personality. In the former, there is the
"ego," and therefore, the foul vasanas get registered; while
in the latter, the soldier's mind was fixed in his love for the
country, and therefore, the murderous activity on the
battle-front could not leave in him any ugly mental
residue. Once the ego is surrendered in the consciousness
of the Divine, the "BONDAGE OF VASANAS CAN NO
MORE REMAIN IN HIM."
AFTER THUS DESCRIBING THE "CONSTITUENTS
THAT MAKE UP ANY ACTION," THE
GEETAACHARYA DESCRIBES THE "IMPULSES TO
KARMA" AND "THE BASIS OF KARMA":
18. Knowledge, the known and knower form the three-fold
"impulse to action" ; the organs, the action, the agent, form the
three-fold "basis of action. "
In the scientific treatment of the subject-matter, Lord
Krishna had already explained the constituent parts that
make up an action and also indicated that the entire
assemblage is of matter only. Continuing the theme, he is
now trying to explain the three-fold impulses that propel
1224
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
activity (Karma-Chodanaa) and also the basis-of-action
(Karma-Sangraha).
The "impulse to action," according to Krishna, is a
threefold arrangement made up of "KNOWLEDGE
(Jnaanam), THE KNOWN (Jneyam) AND THE KNOWER
(Parijnaataa)." These three are called technically in Vedanta
as the 'Triputi': indicating the 'experiencer,' the
'experienced' and the resultant 'experience' --- the
'knower,' the 'known' and the 'knowledge.' Without these
three no knowledge is ever possible, as all "impulses to
act" arise out of a play of these three. The EXPERIENCER,
playing in the field of the EXPERIENCED, gains for
himself the various EXPERIENCES; and these constitute
the secret contents of all actions.
The "impulse to action" can spring either from the
"experiencer," in the form of a DESIRE, or from the
"experienced," in the form of TEMPTATION, or from the
"experience" in the form of similar MEMORIES of some
past enjoyments. Beyond these three there is no other
"impulse to action" (Karma-Chodanaa).
The "impulse to action," when it has arisen, must also find
a field to act in; and the "basis for action" (Karma-Sangraha)
is constituted of the "instruments," the "reaction" and the
"agent" (the actor). This "sense of agency" expressed by the
ego, can maintain itself only as long as it holds a vivid
picture of the "fruit of its action" which it wants to gain.
Fruit, meaning the profit or the gain that is intended to be
1225
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
gained by the action, is indicated here by the term 'work'
(Karma). According to Shri Shankaraacharya 'Karma' here
means the end.
When a desirer, the agent, encouraged by this constant
attraction towards a satisfying end, wants to achieve it, he
must necessarily have the instruments-of-action
(Karanam). These instruments include not only the organs-
of-perception-and-action, but also the inner equipments of
the mind and the intellect. It cannot be very difficult for a
student to understand that: (1) an AGENT having a desire,
(2) maintaining in his mind a clear picture of the END or
the goal, (3) with all the necessary instruments to act
thereupon, would be the sum total contents of any activity
(Karma-Sangraha). If any one of the above three items is
absent, action cannot take place. These three (Karanam,
Kartaa and Karma) are together designated as the parts of
the "Karma-assembly," the "basis of all Karma s" --- (Karma-
Sangraha).
Thus having roughly indicated in this stanza the threefold
"impulses of action" and the three-fold "basis for action,"
Krishna continues to explain in His Song why different
people act so differently under different impulses and
obey different basis in their actions. He divides each one
of them under the three categories of human nature: the
'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic), and the 'dull'
(Tamasic).
1226
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO SHOW THE THREE-
FOLD DISTINCTIONS IN EACH ONE OF THE ABOVE,
ACCORDING TO THE THREE PREDOMINANT
NATURES --- THE 'GOOD,' THE 'PASSIONATE' AND
THE 'DULL':
19. 'Knowledge, ' 'action, ' and 'actor' are declared in the
Science of Temperaments (gunas) to be of three kinds only,
according to the distinctions of temperaments; hear them also
duly.
As an introduction to what is to follow immediately, here
it is said that "knowledge," "action," and the "actor"
(agent), all the three because of the difference of the
temperament in the individuals, at the given time of
observation, fall under a three-fold division. This
classification is being exhaustively explained in the
following stanzas.
Guna is the preponderance of a given type of temperament
in one's inner nature. The human mind and intellect
function constantly, but they always come to function
under the different "climatic conditions" within our mind.
These varying climates of the mind are called the three
gunas: the 'good,' the 'passionate' and the 'dull.'
Under each of these temperaments the entire human
personality behaves differently, and, naturally therefore,
the permutations and combinations of the varieties make
1227
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
up the infinite types that are available in the world; even
within the biography of one and the same personality we
find different moods and behaviours at different periods
of time, depending entirely upon the occasion, the type of
the situation, the nature of the problem and the kind of
challenge the person is called upon to face.
According to the Science of the gunas, as enunciated in
Kapila's Saankhya Yoga, "Knowledge," "Action" and "Actor"
are each classified under these three categories. They are
being enumerated here and Krishna invites the students of
the Geeta to 'LISTEN ATTENTIVELY TO THEM.' It is
meaningless, in fact, to ask Arjuna to listen to the
discourses, because he was all the time listening to the
Lord. The implication must be that the teacher is attracting
the special attention of the student because of the
importance of the theme.
HERE FOLLOWS THE THREE-FOLD TYPE OF
"KNOWLEDGE":
20. That by which one sees the one indestructible reality in all
beings, undivided in the divided, know that "knowledge" as
SATTWIC (Pure) .
Inasmuch as the constituents of action, namely
"knowledge," "work," and the "ego," are under the
influences of different moods, each one of them can fall
into the three types. We fluctuate among these three gunas
1228
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and the different proportions in which they are mixed in
our bosom determine the innumerable types of
individuals that we are.
These detailed descriptions of the different types of
"knowledge," "action" and "actor" are given here not for
the purpose of judging and classifying others, but for the
seeker to UNDERSTAND HIMSELF. A true student of
culture and self-development must try to maintain himself
as far as possible, in the Sattwic temperament. By self-
analysis, we can diagnose ourselves, and immediately
remedy the defects in us.
In this stanza, we have the description of the Sattwic type
of "knowledge." The "knowledge" by which the One
Imperishable Being is seen in all existence, is Sattwic.
Though the forms constituted by the different body-mind-
intellect equipments are all different in different living
creatures, the Sattwic "knowledge" recognises all of them
as the expressions of one and the same Truth, which is the
Essence in all of them.
Just as an electrical engineer recognises the SAME
electricity flowing through all the bulbs, a goldsmith
recognises the ONE metal 'gold' in all ornaments, and
every one of us is aware of the SAME cotton in all shirts,
so also, the intellect that sees the screen upon which the
play of life and the throbs of existence are projected as the
Changeless One has the "knowledge" that is Sattwic.
1229
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
UNDIVIDED IN THE DIVIDED (Avibhaktam Vibhakteshu) -
-- Even if there are a hundred different pots, of different
shapes and colour, and different sizes, the "space" is the
ONE undivided factor in all these different pots. Bulbs are
different but the current that is expressing through them
all is the ONE electricity. Waves are different, and yet the
SAME ocean is the reality and the substance in all the
waves.... Similarly, the one LIFE throbs in all, expressing
itself differently as Its different manifestations, because of
the different constitution in the matter-arrangements. The
"knowledge" that can recognise the play (vilasa) of this
One Principle of Consciousness in and through all the
different equipments, is fully Sattwic.
WHAT TYPE OF AN INTELLECT DOES THE
"PASSIONATE" POSSESS?
21. But that "knowledge" which sees in all beings various
entities of distinct kinds, (and) as different from one another,
know that knowledge as RAJASIC (Passionate) .
After having found a description of the 'good,' we have
herein an equally complete description of the "knowledge"
that is 'passionate' (Rajasic).
The "knowledge" that recognises plurality, by reason of
separateness, is Rajasic in its texture. The "knowledge" of
the 'passionate,' ever restless in its energy, considers
various entities as different from one another; to the
1230
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Rajasic "knowledge," the world is an assortment of
innumerable types of different varieties; the intellect of
such a man perceives distinctions among the living
creatures, and divides them into different classes --- as the
animal, the vegetable and the human kingdoms --- as men
of different castes, creeds, races, nationalities etc.
WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF "KNOWLEDGE" OF
THE DULL?
22. But that "knowledge, " which clings to one single effect, as if
it were the whole, without reason, without foundation in truth
and narrow, that is declared to be TAMASIC (Dull) .
An intellect that has got fumed under the dulling effects of
extreme tamas clings to one single "effect" as though it
were the whole, never enquiring into its "cause." The
"knowledge" of the dull is painted here as that belonging
to the lowest type of spiritual seekers. They are generally
fanatic in their faith and in their devotion, in their views
and values in life. They never enquire into, and try to
discover, the cause of things and happenings; they are
unreasonable (ahaitukam).
Looking through such a confused intellect loaded with
fixed ideas, the dull not only fail to see things as they are,
but invariably project their own ideas upon the world and
judge it all wrongly. In fact, a man of Tamasic intellect
views the world as if it is meant for him and his pleasures
1231
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
alone. He totally ignores the Divine Presence, the Infinite
Consciousness. The "knowledge" of the dull is thus
circumscribed by its own concept of self-importance, and
thus its vision becomes narrow (alpam) and limited.
To summarise, the "knowledge" of the 'good' (Sattwic)
perceives the oneness underlying the universe; the
comprehension of the 'passionate' (Rajasic) recognises the
plurality of the world; and the understanding of the 'dull'
(Tamasic) indicates a highly crystallized, self-centred ego
in him, and his view of the world is always perverted and
ever false.
It must again be noted that in this chapter we shall come
across similar three-fold divisions in the various aspects of
our personal inner life and they are not meant to serve as
reckoners to classify OTHERS, but they are meant to help
us to SIZE OURSELVES UP from time to time.
THE THREE-FOLD NATURE OF "ACTION" IS NOW
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
23. An "action" which is ordained, which is free from
attachment, which is done without love or hatred, by one who is
not desirous of the fruit, that action is declared to be SATTWIC
(pure) .
Having so far explained the three types of "knowledge,"
Krishna now classifies "actions" (Karma) under the same
1232
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
three heads. A Sattwic "action" is the best, productive of
peace within and harmony without the field of activity,
and therefore, it is the purest of the three types of "action."
It is an obligatory action (Niyatam), a work that is
undertaken for the work's own sake, in an attitude that
work itself is worship. Such activities chasten the
personality and are ever performed in a spirit of
inspiration. Inspired activities naturally surpass the very
excellence the actor or the doer is ordinarily capable of.
Such an activity is always undertaken without any
attachment (Sanga-rahitam) and without any anxiety for
gaining any definite end. It is a dedicated activity of love,
and yet, it is not propelled by either love or hatred.
The missionary work undertaken by all prophets and
sages are examples in point. We too can recognise the
same type of work, which we unconsciously perform on
some rare occasions. A typical example that can at this
moment be remembered is an individual nursing his own
wounded limb. As soon as, say, your left toe strikes
against some furniture in the house and gets wounded,
the entire body bends down to nurse it. Herein, there is
neither any special love for the left leg nor any particular
extra attachment for it, as compared with other parts of
the body. To an individual the whole body is himself, and
all parts are equally important; he pervades his whole
body.
In the same fashion, an individual with a Sattwic intellect
that has recognised the All-pervading One, lives in the
1233
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Consciousness of the One Reality that permeates the
whole universe, and therefore, to him the leper and the
prince, the sick and the healthy, the rich and the poor are
so many different parts of his own spiritual personality
only. Such an individual serves the world in a sense of
self-fulfilment and inspired joy.
Summarising, a Sattwic Karma is a humane action,
performed without any attachment, and not motivated
either by likes (Raga) or dislikes (Dvesha), and undertaken
without any desire to enjoy the results thereof. The
"action" itself is its fulfilment; a Sattwic man acts, because
to remain without doing service is a choking death to him.
Such a man of Sattwic "action" alone is a true Brahmana.
WHAT IS RAJASIC ACTION?
24. But that "action" which is done by one, longing for desires,
or gain, done with egoism, or with much effort, is declared to be
RAJASIC (Passionate) .
The "action" of the 'passionate' (Rajasic) is that which is
undertaken to win one's desires with an extremely
insistent "I-act" mentality. Always such undertakings are
works of heavy toil involving great strain, and all the
consequent physical fatigue and mental exhaustion. The
individual is impelled to act and struggle by a well-
defined and extremely arrogant ego-sense. He works,
generally under tension and strain, since he comes to
1234
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
believe that he alone can perform it and nobody else will
ever help him. All the time he is exhausted with his own
anxieties and fears at the thought whether his goal will
ever be achieved, if at all. When an individual works thus
with an arrogant ego, and with all its self-centredness, he
becomes restless enough to make himself totally
exhausted and completely shattered. Such "actions"
belong to the category of the passionate (Rajasic).
All activities of political leaders, social workers, great
industrialists, over-anxious parents, fanatic preachers,
proselytising missionaries and blind money-makers, when
they are at their best, are examples of this type.
THE CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF ACTIONS OF
THE "DULL TYPE" ARE DESCRIBED HEREUNDER:
25. That "action" which is undertaken from delusion, without
regard for the consequence, loss, injury, and ability, is declared
to be TAMASIC (dull) .
The "actions" (Karma) of the 'dull' type (Tamasic) are
performed without any consideration for the
consequences thereof, without any regard for their loss of
power or vitality. Such actors never care for the loss or
injury caused to others by their actions, nor do they pay
any attention to their own status and ability, when they
act. All such careless and irresponsible "actions" (Karma s)
undertaken merely because of some delusory
1235
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
misconception of the goal, fall under the Tamasic type.
Habits of drinking, reckless gambling, corruption, etc., are
all examples of the dull (Tamasic) "actions."
Such people have no regard for the consequences of their
actions. Ere long, they lose their vitality, and injure all
those who are depending upon them. They surrender
their dignity and status, their capacities and subtle
faculties --- all for the sake of their pursuit of a certain
delusory goal in life. All they demand is a temporary joy
of some sense gratification and a tickling satisfaction of
some fancy of the hour.
"Actions" of this type (Tamasic) immediately provide the
performer with a substantial dividend of sorrow. Rajasic
"action" comparatively takes a longer time to bring its
quota of disappointments and sorrows, while Sattwic
"action" is always steady and blissful.
THE THREE KINDS OF 'DOERS' (ACTORS) ARE
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
26. An "agent" who is free from attachment, non-egoistic,
endowed with firmness and enthusiasm, and unaffected by
success or failure, is called SATTWIC (pure) .
So far we have a description of the three types of
"Knowledge" and "Action." The third of the constituents
that goes into the make-up of an action is the "Doer," the
1236
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ego that has the desire to do. Since the three gunas come to
influence the psychological life and the intellectual
perception of all of us, the doer-personality in each one of
us must also change its moods and temperaments
according to the preponderant guna that rules the bosom
at any given moment of time. Consequently, the "ego" also
is classified under three kinds. With this stanza starts the
discussion on the three types of "actors" (Kartaa) who act
in the world outside.
A Sattwic "Actor" is the one who is free from attachment to
any of his kith and kin (Mukta-sangah), and non-egoistic
(Anaham vaadin). He is one who has no clinging
attachment to the things and beings around, as he has no
such false belief that the world outside will bring to him a
desirable fulfilment of his existence. He sincerely feels that
he has not done anything spectacular even when he has
actually done the greatest good to mankind, because he
surrenders his ego-centric individuality to the Lord,
through his perfect attunement with the Infinite.
When such an individual --- who has destroyed in himself
his ego-sense and the consequent sense of attachment ---
works in the worldly fields of activities, he ever acts with
firm resolution (Dhriti), and extreme zeal (Utsaha). The
term 'Dhriti' means "fortitude" --- the subtle faculty in man
that makes him strive continuously towards a determined
goal. When obstacles come his way, it is this faculty of
'Dhriti' that discovers for him more and more courage and
enthusiasm to face them all, and to continue striving
1237
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
towards the same determined goal. This persevering
tendency to push oneself on with the work until one
reaches the halls of success, unmindful of the obstacles
one might meet with on the path, is called 'Dhriti'; and
'Utsaha' means untiring self-application with dynamic
enthusiasm on the path of achievement, while pursuing
success.
Lastly, a Sattwic "actor" is one who ever strives
unperturbed, both in success and in failure, both in
pleasure and in pain. At this moment I can only think of
one example of this type of "actor" (Kartaa): the nurse in
the hospital. She has generally no attachment to the
patient; she has no ego that she is curing the patient,
because she knows that there is the ability of the doctor
behind every successful cure. She has fortitude (Dhriti)
and enthusiasm (Utsaha) --- or else she will not be able to
continue efficiently in her job. And lastly, she is not
concerned with success or failure; she does not rejoice
when a patient walks out fully cured, nor does she moan
for every patient that dies. She cannot afford such an
indulgence. She understands the hospital to be an island
of success and failure, of births and deaths, and she is
there only to serve.
An "actor" (or agent) of the above type is one who suffers
the least dissipation of his energies, and so he successfully
manages to bring into the field of his actions the mighty
total possibilities of a fully unfolded human personality.
The Sattwic "agent" strives joyously in Sattwic "actions,"
1238
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
guided by his Sattwic "knowledge"; his is the most
enduring success, and the world of beings is benefited the
most by the inexhaustible rewards of the love-labour of
such prophets.
A Sattwic Kartaa realises that in all his actions, his body,
mind and intellect come into play and serve the world
only because the Spirit, the Infinite, is in contact with
them. The equipments of matter are as helpless as a
broomstick left in a corner. Whenever the body functions,
the mind-intellect-equipment throbs and heaves in its
pursuit of the new ideals and achievements. And this is
because of the Life which thrills them into their respective
expressions.
The faculties of the intellect, the beauties of the heart, the
vitality of the body, are all vehicles for the Sacred Will of
the Spirit to sing through. If the vehicles are not properly
disciplined, and if they do not come to surrender totally to
the Infinite, the Lord, they get broken and shattered.
A Sattwic "doer" is one who is ever conscious of the touch
of the Infinite Light in all his activities.
WHO IS THE RAJASIC "DOER"?
27. Passionate, desiring to gain the fruits-of-actions, greedy,
harmful, impure, full of delight and grief, such an "agent" is
said to be RAJASIC (passionate) .
1239
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A "doer" belonging to the PASSIONATE type is being
exhaustively painted here. He is full of desires, passions
and attachments, and he tenaciously clings on to some
wished-for gain or goal. He is swayed by passion (raaga)
and eagerly seeks the fruit of his work. He is ever greedy
(Lubdhah) in the sense that such a Rajasic "doer" is never
satisfied with what he gains and greedily thirsts for more.
His thirst is insatiable because his desires multiply from
moment to moment.
When a man, full of desires and passions, works with
mounting greed, he naturally becomes very malignant
(Himsaatmakah) in his programmes of pursuit. He never
hesitates to injure another, if such injury were to win his
end. He is blind to the amount of sorrow he might bring to
others; he is concerned only with the realisation of his
ulterior motives. When a man of this type (with the above
qualities) becomes maliciously resolved to gain his own
ends, it is but natural that he becomes impure (Ashuchih),
meaning "immoral."
Even unrighteous methods and vulgar immoralities are no
ban to such a "doer" and he will pursue them, if his
particular desire can be fulfilled thereby. He may
ordinarily be quite a moral and righteous man, but the
beauty of his composure and the steadiness of his
morality, expressed during his quieter moments, all fly
away as brilliant splinters when the sledge hammer of his
greed and passion, vengeful plans and malignant
schemes, thuds upon his heart.
1240
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is but natural that such a PASSIONATE "doer," when he
acts in his blinding desires, comes to live, all through his
embodied existence, a sad life of agitations, moved by joys
and sorrows, "full of delight and grief," (Harsha-Shoka-
Anvitah). This completes the picture of a man who is a
'passionate' (Rajasic) "doer."
AND HOW DOES A TAMASIC "DOER" FUNCTION IN
THE FIELD OF ACTIVITY?
28. Unsteady, vulgar, unbending, cheating, malicious, lazy,
despondent, and procrastinating, such an "agent" is said to be
TAMASIC (Dull) .
Here we have a description of a Tamasic "doer" pursuing
his work motivated by his Tamasic "knowledge" and
expressing himself through his Tamasic "actions."
UNCONTROLLED (Ayuktah) --- A "doer" who has no
control over himself, and therefore, is ever unsteady in his
application, is of the Tamasic type. He becomes
unbalanced in his activities, because his mind does not
obey the warnings of his intellect. A yukta-mind is one
which is obedient to and perfectly under the control of the
intellect. A tamasic man is uncultured inasmuch as he acts
in the world, spurred by the impulses and instincts of his
own mind. The glory of a cultured man comes out only
when he brings the impulsive storms of his mind under
the chastening control and intelligent guidance of his
1241
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellect. He is Ayuktah who behaves with no control over
his own animal impulses and low instincts. When such an
individual acts in the world, he cannot but behave as a
vulgar man (Praakrita).
If shown an intellectual mirror, he will never admit the
reflected vulgarities as his own, nor will he acknowledge
his way of living as base and licentious. He is arrogant
and obstinate (Stabdhah) and in his stubborn nature he will
not lend himself to be persuaded to act more honourably.
DISHONEST (Shathah) --- He becomes dishonest. He
becomes extremely deceitful. Herein the dishonesty, or
deceitfulness, arises out of his incapacity to see any point-
of-view other than the false conclusions he has arrived at.
Such an individual is not a dependable character, for he
conceals his real motives and purposes and secretly works
out his programmes which generally bring about a lot of
sorrow to all around him.
MALICIOUS (Naishkritikah) --- The term describes,
according to Shankara, one who is bent upon creating
quarrels and disputes among people. With a vengefulness,
such a person pursues his adversary to destroy him.
INDOLENT (Alasah) --- The "dull doer" is a very indolent
man spending his time in over-indulgence. He is an idler,
for he avoids all creative endeavours and productive
efforts, if by deceit or cunning, he can easily and readily
procure enjoyable chances and pleasure-goods. He
1242
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
pursues such a path, however immoral it may be. He is a
social parasite; he enjoys and consumes without striving
and producing. He puts forth no effort; drowsiness of
intellect that renders him incapable of correct thinking is a
typical feature. The three brothers, from Lanka, in fact,
represent these three types of "doers." Of them,
Kumbhakarna, who sleeps six months and wakes up only
to spend the rest of the six months in eating, is symbolic of
a Tamasic "doer."
DESPONDENT (Vishaadi) --- He is one who will not meet
the challenge of life squarely. He has neither the vitality
nor the stamina to stand up against the challenges of life.
This is because his over-indulgent nature has sapped up
all his vitality and courage to meet life. Invariably, he
spends his time complaining of men and things around
him and wishes for a secure spot in the world, where he
can be away from all obstacles so that he may peacefully
continue satisfying his endless thirst for sensuous
enjoyments.
PROCRASTINATER (Deergha-sootree) --- An individual so
benumbed in his inner nature, slowly gathers within
himself an incapacity to arrive at any firm judgement.
Even if he comes to any vague decision, he has not the will
to continue the consistent pursuit of his judgement.
Indolent as he is by nature, more often than not, he
postpones the right until it is too late. This procrastinating
tendency is natural to a Tamasic "actor." The term deergha-
sootree has been interpreted by some commentators as
1243
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"harbouring deep and long (deergha) vengeance against
others (sootra)," which is also not inappropriate in the
context of the thought development in this stanza.
Thus, one who is unsteady, vulgar, arrogant, deceitful,
malicious, indolent, despondent and procrastinating,
belongs to the 'dullest' type of "agents" available in the
fields of human endeavour. This and the two preceding
stanzas provide us with three beautifully framed mental
pictures, bringing out in all details the Sattwic, the Rajasic
and the Tamasic types of "doers" available in the world. As
we have already emphasised these pictures are NOT
yardsticks to classify OTHERS, but are meant for the
seekers to observe themselves. Whenever a true seeker
discovers symptoms of Tamas and Rajas growing in him
he should take notice of them at once and consciously
strive to regain his Sattwic beauty.
ACCORDING TO THE PREDOMINATING GUNA,
"UNDERSTANDING" AND "FORTITUDE" ALSO CAN
FALL UNDER A THREE-FOLD CLASSIFICATION ---
SAYS KRISHNA:
29. Hear (you) the three-fold division of "understanding" and
"fortitude" (made) according to the qualities, as I declare them
fully and severally, O Dhananjaya.
'Work,' no doubt, is constituted of the three factors: the
"knowledge," the "action" and the "actor." Each of these
1244
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
three factors was shown to fall under a three-fold
classification and all these classifications were described in
the foregoing NINE STANZAS. When an actor, guided by
his knowledge, acts in the world, no doubt, manifestation
of work takes place. But underlying these three, are TWO
FACTORS which supply the fuel and the motive force in
all sustained endeavours. They are "understanding"
(Buddhi) and "fortitude" (Dhriti).
Buddhi, or "understanding," means "the intellectual
capacity in the individual to grasp what is happening
around him." "Fortitude" (Dhriti) is "the faculty of
constantly keeping one idea in the mind and consistently
working it out to its logical end"; consistency of purpose
and self-application, without allowing oneself to be tossed
about hither and thither like a dry leaf at the mercy of a
fickle breeze, is called "fortitude."
Every action is controlled and guided by our intellectual
capacity of "understanding," and faithful consistency of
purpose, "fortitude." This stanza is an introduction to a
scientific discussion of these two faculties (Buddhi and
Dhriti) and their three-fold classification.
WHAT IS SATTWIC UNDERSTANDING?
30. That which knows the paths of work and renunciation, what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and
1245
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
fearlessness, bondage and liberation, that "understanding" is
SATTWIC (pure) , O Partha.
The intellect may be considered as having the best type of
"understanding" if it can readily discriminate among
beings and situations in its field of activity. The intellect
has various functions --- observing, analysing, classifying,
willing, wishing, remembering and a host of others --- and
yet, we find that the one faculty essential in all of them is
the "power of discrimination." Without 'discrimination,'
neither observation nor classification, neither
understanding nor judgement, is ever possible.
Essentially, therefore, the function of the intellect is
"discrimination," which is otherwise called the faculty of
"right understanding."
An "understanding" (Buddhi) which is capable of clearly
discriminating between the RIGHT field of pursuit and
the WRONG field of false proposition, is the highest type
of "understanding." The individual must have the nerve to
pursue the right path and also the heroism to defect from
all wrong fields of futile endeavour. In short, true
"understanding" has a ready ability to discriminate
between actions that are to be pursued (Pravritti) and
actions that are to be shunned (Nivritti).
An intellect that can discriminate between the true and the
false types of work must also be able to function in
judging correctly "WHAT IS RIGHT AND WHAT IS
WRONG." Every moment, we are called upon to decide
1246
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
what responses should be made to the flux of happenings
and challenges that continuously take place around us. A
Sattwic Buddhi always helps us to arrive at the correct
judgement. A person in a mood of anger or with a
wounded vanity, suddenly resigns his job only to regret
thereafter, the folly of his action. His capacity to judge
rightly was mutilated by his bad temper of the moment, or
by his exaggerated vanity, and so he comes to regret.
Arjuna himself had come to a state of mental hysteria
when he complained that this power of judgement had
been lost, mainly because of his inordinate attachment to
his kith and kin.
WHAT IS TO BE FEARED AND WHAT IS NOT TO BE
FEARED (Bhaya-abhaya) --- "Fools rush in where angels
fear to tread." Men of indiscrimination, in their false
evaluation of the sense-world, hug on to delusory objects
and things, fearing nothing from them, and yet, they fear
to read and understand philosophy, to strive and to
experience the Infinite. A true intellect must have the right
"understanding" to discriminate between what is to be
feared and what is not to be feared.
BONDAGE AND LIBERATION (Bandham-Moksham-cha) --
- If the "understanding" is clear, we can easily recognise
the tendencies in our make-up that entangle the Higher in
us, and curtail its fuller play. To observe and analyse
ourselves with the required detachment, and to evaluate
critically our psychological behaviours and intellectual
attitudes in life is not easy; it is possible only for those
1247
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
who are endowed with a well-cultivated Sattwic
"understanding." If we cultivate Sattwic "understanding,"
it can not only diagnose for us the false values and wrong
emotions that work in us, but also intuitively discover the
processes of unwinding ourselves from these cruel
vasanas, and help us to regain our personality-freedom
from these subjective entanglements.
To summarise: the Sattwic Buddhi is defined as one which
makes known to us what type of work is to be done, and
what type of work is to be renounced, which distinguishes
the right from the wrong, which knows what is to be
feared and what is to be faced fearlessly, which shows us
the causes of our own present ugliness in life and explains
to us the remedies for the same.
Proper "understanding" can make a garden in a desert,
can churn out pure success from every threat of failure.
Without "understanding" and "fortitude," even the best of
chances will become utter disaster. Right "understanding"
can convert the greatest of tragedies into chances for
ushering in a prosperous destiny.
WHAT IS RAJASIC UNDERSTANDING?
31. That by which one wrongly understands DHARMA and
ADHARMA and also what ought to be done and what ought
not to be done, that intellect (understanding) , O Partha, is
RAJASIC (passionate) .
1248
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The "understanding" of the passionate (Rajasic) comes to
judge the righteous (Dharma) and the unrighteous
(Adharma), what is to be done and what is not to be done,
in a slightly perverted manner (Ayathaavat). Such a Rajasic
"understanding" cannot reach right judgements, because it
is invariably coloured by its own preconceived notions
and powerful likes and dislikes.
WHAT IS TAMASIC "UNDERSTANDING"?
32. That which, enveloped in darkness, sees ADHARMA as
DHARMA, and all things perverted, that intellect
(understanding) , O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .
The type of "understanding" which brings sorrow to
everyone including the individual himself, is the
"understanding" of the 'dull' (Tamasic). Actually it is no
"understanding" at all; it can, at best, be called only a
chronic bundle of misunderstandings. Such an intellect
runs into its own conclusions, but unfortunately, it always
lands up with wrong conclusions only. It has such a
totally perverted "understanding" that it recognises "A-
dharma" as "Dharma," the 'right' as 'wrong.' This faculty of
coming to wrong judgements is amply seen in the dull,
because their entire reasoning capacity is enveloped by
complete darkness and egoistic drunkenness.
DISCUSSING THE THREE TYPES OF "FORTITUDE,"
LORD KRISHNA CONTINUES:
1249
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
33. The unwavering "fortitude" by which, through YOGA, the
functions of the mind, the PRANA and the senses are
restrained, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is SATTWIC (pure) .
In this section of three stanzas we get a description of the
three types of "fortitude" (Dhriti).
Dhriti is that power within ourselves by which we
constantly see the goal we want to achieve, and while
striving towards it, Dhriti discovers for us the necessary
constancy of purpose to pursue the path, in spite of all the
mounting obstacles that rise on the way. Dhriti paints the
idea, maintains it constantly in our vision, makes us
steadily strive towards it, and when obstacles come, Dhriti
mobilises secret powers within us to face them all
courageously, heroically, and steadily. We shall use the
term "fortitude" to indicate all the above-mentioned
suggestions implied in the term Dhriti.
This secret fire in man that makes him glow in life and
rockets him to spectacular achievements is not generally
found in those who have no control over themselves and
are voluptuously indulging in sensuous fields. A
dissipated individual, who has drained off his energy
through wrong-thinking and false-living, shall discover no
Dhriti in himself. The subtle faculty of "fortitude" is being
analysed and classified here, under the three main heads:
the 'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic) and the 'dull'
(Tamasic). But in all of them, it is interesting to note, Dhriti
1250
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stands for "the constancy of purpose" with which every
individual pursues his field of endeavour chosen for him,
with his own "understanding" (Buddhi).
The constancy with which one steadily controls one's
mind and sense-organs and their activities, through
single-pointed attention and faithful concentration upon a
given point-of-contemplation, is the Dhriti of the Sattwic
type.
Mind alone can control the organs-of-action (Karma-
Indriyas) and the organs-of-perception (Jnana-Indriyas). To
dissuade the organs-of-action and perception from their
false pursuits of the ephemeral joys and the consequent
dissipations, the mind must have some fixed source to
draw its energies and satisfactions from. Without fixing
the mind upon something nobler and higher, we cannot
detach it from its present pursuits. Therefore, Krishna
insists that Yoga is unavoidable.
With faithful contemplation upon the Self, the mind gains
in steadiness and equipoise, peace and satisfaction, and
therefore, it develops a capacity to rule over the sense-
organs. But all these achievements are possible only when
the inward personality can constantly supply a steady
stream of Dhriti. Constancy in endeavour and consistency
of purpose or "fortitude" that is expressed in any field of
activity, becomes Sattwic Dhriti when constituted as
described above.
1251
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT IS RAJASIC 'Dhriti'?
34. But the "fortitude, " O Arjuna, by which one holds fast to
duty, pleasure and wealth, from attachment and craving for the
fruits-of-actions, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is RAJASIC
(passionate) .
The constancy with which a person holds fast to duty
(Dharma), wealth (Artha) and pleasure (Kama), encouraged
by his growing desire to enjoy the fruit of each of them, is
the steadiness or "fortitude" of the Rajasic type. It is
interesting to note that in the enumeration Krishna avoids
Moksha and only takes the first three of the "four ends of
man" (Purushaartha), for, a Rajasic man is satisfied with the
other fields of self-effort and has no demand for spiritual
liberation.
The constancy of pursuit of such an individual will be in
these three fields of duty, wealth and pleasure, and he will
be pursuing one or the other of them with an extreme
desire to enjoy the resultant satisfactions. He follows
Dharma, only to gain the heavens; he pursues Artha so that
he may have power in this life; and he pursues Kaama
with a firm belief and faith that sensuous objects can give
him all satisfactions in life.
The steadiness with which one with such an
"understanding" would strive and work in these fields is
classified as Rajasic Dhriti.
1252
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT IS TAMASIC DHRITI?
35. The 'constancy' because of which a stupid man does not
abandon sleep, fear, grief, depression, and also arrogance
(conceit) , that "fortitude, " O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .
In this stanza we have the description of the dull type of
"fortitude," and it is not very difficult to understand it
because a substantial majority of us belong to this type!
The steadiness-of-purpose with which one DOES NOT
give up one's dreams and imaginations, fears and
agitations, griefs and sorrows, depressions and arrogance,
is the Dhriti of the Tamasic type.
The term dream (Swapna) is used here to indicate fancied
imaginations thrown up by a mind that is ALMOST
drowned in sleep. To see things which are not there but
are delusorily projected by one's own fancy, is called a
dream. The dull personalities project upon the world of
objects a dream-like value of reality and false joy, and then
laboriously strive to gain them.
FEAR (Bhaya) --- Such men of delusion will have many a
fancied fear of the future, which, of course, may never
come to pass, but it can efficiently destroy the equilibrium
and balance, poise and peace in the individual's life. There
are many among us who have experienced such fears by
the hundred in the past. Some fear that they are going to
die, but each following day a healthy man wakes up to
1253
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
face the world! Psychologically, they are victims of a fear-
complex. And it is interesting to note with what great
tenacity these men hug on to such complexes.
GRIEF, DEPRESSION AND ARROGANCE (Shokam,
Vishaadam, Madam) --- These again are great channels
through which human vitality gets dissipated. A man of
extreme 'dullness' will constantly keep these three within
his bosom and thereby suffer a sense of self-depletion and
inner exhaustion. "Grief" (Shokam) is, in general, the
painful feeling of disappointment at something that has
already happened in the PAST; while "depression"
(Vishaadam) generally reaches our bosom as a result of our
despair regarding the FUTURE; and "arrogance" (Madam)
is the sense of lusty conceit with which a foolish man lives
his immoral, low life in the PRESENT.
He who follows these five values of life is called by
Krishna a fool (Durmedhaa), and the constancy with which
such a fool follows his life of dreams and fears, griefs and
despondencies, arrogance and passion, is indicated as the
Dhriti of the Tamasic type.
"PLEASURE" ALSO IS THREE-FOLD ACCORDING TO
THE PREDOMINANT "GUNA" IN THE INDIVIDUAL;
HERE FOLLOWS THE THREE-FOLD DIVISION OF
"PLEASURE," WHICH IS THE EFFECT OF "ACTION":
1254
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
36. And now hear from me, O best among the Bharatas, of the
three-fold "pleasure, " in which one rejoices by practice, and
surely comes to the end-of-pain.
In the logical thought development in this chapter,
hitherto we found the three factors that constitute the
"impulse of all actions": (1) the knowledge, (2) the actor
and (3) the action. Afterwards, the very motive forces in
all activity --- which not only propel activity, but
intelligently control and direct it --- the Buddhi and the
Dhriti, have also been shown severally, in their different
types.
Every "actor" acts in his field, guided by his "knowledge,"
ruled by his "understanding" (Buddhi), and maintained by
his "fortitude" (Dhriti). The dissection and observation of
"work" is now complete since we have understood the
"anatomy and physiology" of work. The "Psychology" of
work is now being discussed: why does man act? In fact,
every living creature acts propelled by the same instinct,
namely, the craving for happiness.
With the three constituents of action --- namely,
"knowledge," "agency" and "action" --- helped by the right
type of "understanding" (Buddhi) and "fortitude" (Dhriti),
every living creature from the womb to the tomb
continues acting in the world. To what purpose? Everyone
acts for the same goal of gaining happiness, meaning, a
better sense of fulfilment.
1255
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
And though the goal be thus one and the same (viz.,
happiness), since different types of constituents go into
the make-up of our actions, and since we are so different
in the texture of our UNDERSTANDING and
FORTITUDE, the path adopted by each one of us is
distinctly different from those adopted by all others. In
and through the variety of actions in the universe, all
people --- the good, the passionate, and the dull --- seek
their own sense of satisfaction.
Since each of the five component parts that make up an
"action" is of the three different types, it follows that
"happiness" that is gained by the different types must also
be different in its texture, perfection and completeness.
Here follows a description of the three types of
"happiness."
THROUGH PRACTICE (Abhyaasat) --- Through a
familiarity of this complete scheme-of-things within, an
individual can, to a large extent, come to diagnose himself
and understand the why and the wherefore of all his
miseries. He can thus learn to readjust and re-evaluate his
life and thereby come to end his sorrows totally, or at
least, alleviate them to some extent.
WHAT IS SATTWIC (PURE) "HAPPINESS"?
1256
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
37. That which is like poison at first, but in the end like nectar,
that "pleasure" is declared to be SATTWIC (pure) , born of the
purity of one's own mind, due to Self realisation.
That "happiness" which, in the beginning, is like poison
and very painful, but which, when it works itself out,
fulfils itself in a nectarine success, is the enduring
"happiness" of the 'good' (Sattwic). In short, "happiness"
that arises from constant effort is the "happiness" that can
yield us a greater beauty and a larger sense of fulfilment.
The flimsy "happiness" that is gained through sense-
indulgence and sense-gratification is a joy that is fleeting,
and after its onslaught there is a terrific under-current that
comes to upset our equilibrium and drag us into the
depths of despondency.
The joy arising out of inner self-control and the
consequent sense of self-perfection is no cheap
gratification. In the beginning its practice is certainly very
painful and extremely arduous. But one who has
discovered in oneself the necessary courage and heroism
to walk the precipitous "path" of self-purification and
inward balance, comes to enjoy the subtlest of happiness
and the all-fulfilling sense of inward peace. This
"happiness" (Sukham), arising out of self-control and self-
discipline, is classified here by the Lord as Sattwic
"happiness."
BORN OUT OF THE PURITY OF ONE'S OWN MIND
(Atma Buddhi Prasaada-jam) --- By carefully living the life of
1257
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the 'good' (Sattwic) and acting in disciplined self-control,
as far as possible in the world, maintaining the Sattwic
qualities in all their "component parts," one can develop
the 'Prasaada' of one's inner nature. The term 'Prasaada' is
very often misunderstood in ritualistic language.
The peace and tranquillity, the joy and expansion, that the
mind and intellect come to experience as a result of their
discipline and contemplation are the true "Prasaada." The
joy arising out of spiritual practices, provided by the
integration of the inner nature, is called 'Prasada' which is
the Sattwic "happiness," Prasaada-jam. In short, the sense of
fulfilment and the gladness of heart that well up in the
bosom of a cultured man, as a result of his balanced and
self-disciplined life of high ideals and divine values of life,
are the enduring "happiness" of all Men-of-Perfection, of
all true men of religion.
WHAT IS RAJASIC (PASSIONATE) "HAPPINESS"?
38. That pleasure which arises from the contact of the sense-
organs with the objects, (which is) at first like nectar, (but is) in
the end like poison, that is declared to be RAJASIC (passionate)
.
That happiness which arises in our bosom when the
appropriate world-of-objects comes in contact with our
sense-organs is indeed a thrill that is nectarine in the
beginning, but unfortunately, it vanishes as quickly as it
1258
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
comes, dumping the enjoyer into a pit of exhaustion and
indeed into a sense of ill-reputed dissipation.
Rajasic "happiness" arises only when the sense-organs are
actually in contact with the sense-objects. Unfortunately,
this contact cannot be permanently established; for the
objects are always variable. And the subjective mind and
intellect, the instruments that come in contact with the
objects, are also variable and changing. The sense-organs
cannot afford to embrace the sense-objects at all times
with the same appetite, and even if they do so, the very
object in the embrace of the sense-organs withers and
putrefies, raising the stink of death. No man can FULLY
enjoy even the passing glitter of joy that the sense-organs
give him, for even at the moment of enjoyment the joy-
possibility in it gets unfortunately tainted by an anxiety
that it may leave him. Thus, to a true thinker, the
temporary joys of sense-objects are not at all satisfactory,
since they bury the enjoyer, ere long, in a tomb of sorrow.
This sort of "happiness" is classified as the Rajasic type of
"happiness" and is generally pursued by men of passion.
WHAT IS TAMASIC (DULL) "HAPPINESS"?
39. The pleasure, which at first and in the sequel deludes the
Self, arising from sleep, indolence and heedlessness, is declared
to be TAMASIC (Dull) .
1259
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The "happiness" of the 'dull' (Tamasic) is that which
deludes the Higher in us, and vitiates the culture in us;
and, when the pursuit of such "happiness" is continued for
a length of time, it gives to the intellect a thick crust of
wrong values and false ideals, and ruins the spiritual
sensitivity of the personality.
This type of Tamasic "happiness" satisfies mere sense-
cravings; for such Tamasic "happiness" arises, according to
the Lord, from sleep (Nidraa), indolence (Aalasya) and
heedlessness (Pramaada).
SLEEP (Nidraa) --- It is not the psychological condition of
the everyday sleep that is meant here. Philosophically, the
term "sleep" stands for "the non-apprehension of Reality,"
and the incapacity of the dull-witted to perceive any
permanent, ever-existing goal of life. This encourages one
to seek simple sense-gratifications at the flesh level.
INDOLENCE (Aalasya) --- It is the incapacity of the
intellect to think out correctly the problems that face it and
come to correct judgement. Such an inertia of the intellect
makes it insensitive to the inspiring song of life, and a
person having such an intellect is generally tossed here
and there by the passing tides of his own instincts and
impulses.
HEEDLESSNESS (Pramaada) --- As every challenge
reaches us and demands our response to it, no doubt, the
Higher in us truly guides our activities; but the lower,
1260
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
indolent mind seeks a compromise and tries to act,
heedless of the voice of the Higher. When an individual
has thus lived for some time carelessly ignoring the Voice
of the Higher, he becomes more and more removed from
his divine perfections. He sinks lower and lower into his
animal nature.
When such an individual, who is heedless of the higher
calls, indolent at his intellectual level and completely
asleep to the existence and the play of Reality, seeks
"happiness," he only seeks a "happiness" that deludes the
soul, both at the beginning and at the end. Such
"happiness" is here classified by Krishna as "dull"
(Tamasic).
HERE FOLLOWS A STANZA WHICH CONCLUDES
THE SUBJECT OF OUR PRESENT DISCUSSION:
40. There is no being on earth, or again in heaven among the
"DEVAS" (heavenly beings) , who is totally liberated from the
three qualities, born of PRAKRITI (matter) .
With the above stanza the exhaustive description of the
three Gunas as impinging upon the personality of all
living organisms, is concluded. On the whole, this section
of the chapter has given us a psychological explanation for
the variety of men that we meet with, in the world-of-
plurality, not only in their personality-structures but also
in their individual-behaviours. The three types of beings
1261
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
have been described exhaustively --- by an analysis of
"knowledge," "action," "agent," "understanding" and
"fortitude." This is only for our guidance so that we know
where we stand in our own inner nature and outer
manifestations.
If we detect, with the above-mentioned slide-rule of
personality, that we belong to the Tamasic or the Rajasic
types, we, as seekers of cultural expression and growth,
are to take warning and strive to heave ourselves into the
Sattwic state. Remember, and I repeat, REMEMBER, these
classifications are given NOT TO CLASSIFY OTHERS but
to provide us with a ready-reckoner to help us in our
constant and daily self-analysis and self-discipline.
These three gunas have been described because there is no
living organism in the world, "NO CREATURE EITHER
ON EARTH OR AGAIN AMONG THE GODS IN
HEAVEN," who is totally free from the influence of these
three gunas; no living creature can act or work beyond the
frontiers provided by these three gunas. Nature (Prakriti)
itself is constituted of these gunas; the play of these three
gunas is the very expression of Prakriti.
But at the same time, no two creatures react to the world
outside in the same fashion, because the proportion in
which these three gunas come to influence each one is
different at different times. These three gunas put together
are the manifestation of "Maya." Individuals differ from
one another because of the different textures of the gunas
1262
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that predominantly rule over them; it is this Maya that
gives them their individuality. An individual cannot, at
any time, exist without all these three gunas, whatever be
their relative proportion.
No sample of "coffee" is possible without its three
ingredients, the decoction, the milk, and the sugar; but at
the same time, the proportion in which they are mixed
together may be different from cup to cup according to the
taste of the partaker. He who has transcended the three
gunas comes to experience the very plurality in the world
as the play of the One Infinite. So, let us introspect and
evaluate ourselves every day, every minute. Let us avoid
the lower gunas and steadily work ourselves up towards
the achievement of the Sattwic state. Only after reaching
the status of the good (Sattwic) can we be ushered into the
State of Godhood --- Perfection Absolute.
With these three measuring rods --- the qualities (gunas)
Krishna classifies the entire community of man under
three distinct types. The criterion of this classification is
the texture of man's inner equipments which he brings
into play for his achievements in his fields of activity.
Accordingly, the Hindu scriptures have brought the entire
humanity under a four-fold classification. So, its
applicability is not merely confined to India --- BUT IS
UNIVERSAL.
Certain well-defined characteristics determine the types of
these four classes of human beings; they are not always
1263
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
determined by heredity, or accident of birth. They are
termed, in our society, as: the Brahmanas --- with a major
portion of Sattwa, a little Rajas and with minimum Tamas;
the Kshatriyas --- mostly Rajas with some Sattwa, and a
dash of Tamas; the Vaishyas --- with more Rajas, less Sattwa
and some Tamas; and the Shudras --- mostly Tamas, a little
Rajas, with only a suspicion of Sattwa.
This four-fold classification is universal and for all times.
Even today it holds good. In modern language, the four
types of people may be called: (1) the creative thinkers; (2)
the politicians; (3) the commercial employers; and (4) the
labourers (the proletarians). We can easily recognise how
each subsequent classification holds in awe and reverence
the previous higher class --- the employees are afraid of
the employer, the commercial men are suspicious of the
politicians and the politicians tremble at the courageous,
independent thinkers.
In the following stanzas, by the discussions contained in
them, in the immediate context of the Krishna-Arjuna
summit talks, the Lord is only trying to make Arjuna
understand that his inner equipment is such that he can be
classified only as a Kshatriya. Being a Kshatriya, his duty is
to fight, championing the cause of the good, and thus
establish righteousness. He cannot, with profit, retire to
the jungle and meditate for self-unfoldment, since he will
have to grow, first of all, into the status of the Sattwic
personality (Brahmana) before he can successfully strive on
the path of total retirement and a life of rewarding
1264
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
contemplation. Therefore, with the available texture of
mind and intellect, the only spiritual Sadhana left for
Arjuna is to act vigorously in the field of contention.
Thereby he can exhaust his existing vasanas of Rajas and
Tamas.
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSES THE DUTIES ORDAINED
BY ONE'S NATURE, "SWABHAAVA," AND ONE'S
STATION IN LIFE, "SWADHARMA," ARE LAID OUT
WITH THE THOROUGHNESS OF A LAW BOOK:
41. Of scholars (BRAHMANAS) , of leaders (KSHATRIYAS)
and of traders (VAISHYAS) , as also of workers (SHUDRAS) ,
O Parantapa, the duties are distributed according to the
qualities born of their own nature.
After dealing with the various gunas in the preceding
stanza, Krishna now applies them to the social fabric of
humanity and thus intelligently classifies the entire
mankind under four distinct heads: the Brahmanas, the
Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras.
Different types of duties are assigned to each of these
classes of individuals depending upon their nature
(Swabhaava), which is ordered by the proportion of the
gunas in the make-up of each type of inner equipment. The
duties prescribed for a particular type depend upon the
manifestation of the inner ruling gunas, as expressed in the
individual's contact with the world and his activities in
1265
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
society. The good and bad are not diagnosed by merely
examining the texture of the person's skin or the colour of
his hair; an individual is judged only by his expressions in
life and by the quality of his contacts with the world
outside. These alone can reflect one's inner personality ---
the quality and texture of the contents of one's mind-
intellect.
After testing and determining the quality of the inner
personality, the individuals in the community are
classified, and different types of duties are prescribed for
each. Naturally, the duties prescribed for a Brahmana are
different from those expected of a Kshatriya; and the work
of the Vaishya and the Shudra should necessarily be
different from that of the Brahmana and the Kshatriya. The
Shastra enjoins duties, by pursuing which the
preponderant Tamas can be evolved into Rajas, which, in
its turn, can grow to become Sattwa. And, even then, the
seeker must wait for the sublimation of Sattwa, when
alone the final experience of the Infinite is gained.
By observing a person one can conclude as to which class
he belongs to --- whether to the Brahmana, the Kshatriya,
the Vaishya or the Shudra. In this context, when we say a
man is Sattwic, it only means that the Sattwic qualities are
predominant in him; even in the most Sattwic of persons,
at times, the Rajasic and the Tamasic qualities can and will
show up; so too, even in the most Tamasic man, Sattwa and
Rajas will necessarily show up sometimes. No one is
exclusively of one guna alone.
1266
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Today, as they are now worked out in India, these four
classifications have lost much of their meaning. They
signify merely a hereditary birth-right in the society, a
mere physical distinction that divides the society into
castes and sub-castes. A true Brahmana is necessarily a
highly cultured Sattwic man who can readily control his
sense-organs, and with perfect mastery over his mind, can
raise himself, through contemplation, to the highest peaks
of meditation upon the Infinite. But today's Brahmana is
one who is claiming his distinction by birth alone and
alas! he gets no reverence, because he has not striven to
deserve it.
ANSWERING THE FOUR TYPES OF NATURE, AS
DETERMINED BY THEIR PSYCHOLOGICAL
CHARACTERISTICS, THERE ARE FOUR KINDS OF
SOCIAL LIVING, EACH HAVING A DEFINITE
FUNCTION IN SOCIETY: THEY ARE DESCRIBED
BELOW:
42. Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness and
also uprightness, knowledge, realisation, belief-in-God --- are the
duties of the BRAHMANAS, born of (their own) nature.
Herein we have a detailed enumeration of the duties of a
Brahmana born out of his own predominantly Sattwic
nature. Serenity (Shama), is one of his duties. Shama is
controlling the mind from running into the world-of-
objects seeking sense-enjoyments. Even if we shut off the
1267
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
world-of-objects by carrying ourselves away from the
tumults and temptations of life into a quiet, lonely place,
even there our minds will stride forth into the sense-fields
through the memories of our past indulgences. To control
consciously this instinctive flow of the mind towards the
sense-objects is called Shama.
SELF-CONTROL (Dama) --- Controlling the sense-organs,
which are the gateways through which the external world
of stimuli infiltrates into our mental domain and mars our
peace, is called Dama. A man practising Dama, even if he
be in the midst of sensuous objects, is not disturbed by
them. A true Brahmana is one who practises constantly
both Shama and Dama, serenity and self-control.
AUSTERITY (Tapas) --- Conscious physical self-denial in
order to economise the expenditure of human energy so
lavishly spent in the wrong channels of sense-indulgence,
and conserving it for reaching the higher unfoldment
within is called Tapas. By the practice of Shama and Dama,
the Brahmana will be steadily controlling both the mad
rush of his senses and his mind-wandering. This helps
him to conserve his inner vitality which would have been
otherwise spent in hunting after sense-joys. This
conserved energy is utilised for higher flights in
meditation. This subjective process of economising,
conserving, and redirecting one's energies within is called
Tapas. It is a Brahmana's duty to live in Tapas.
1268
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PURITY (Shaucham) --- The Sanskrit term used here
includes external cleanliness and internal purity. Habits of
cleanliness in one's personal life and surroundings are the
governing conditions in the life of one who is practising
both Shama and Dama. The practice of Tapas makes him
such a disciplined person that he cannot stand any
disorderly confusion or state of neglect around and about
him. A person living in the midst of things thrown about
in a disorderly manner is certainly a man of slothful
nature and slovenly habits. It is the duty of the Brahmana
to keep himself ever clean and pure.
FORBEARANCE (Kshaanti) --- To be patient and forgiving
and thus to live without struggling even against wrongs
done against one, is "forbearance" --- the duty of a
Brahmana. Such an individual will never harbour any
hatred for anyone; he lives equanimously amidst both the
good and the bad.
UPRIGHTNESS (Aarjavam) --- This is a quality which
makes an individual straightforward in all his dealings,
and his uprightness makes him fearless in life. He is afraid
of none, and he makes no compromise of the higher calls
with the lower murmurings.
Cultivating the above six qualities --- serenity (Shama),
self-control (Dama), austerity (Tapas), purity (Shaucham),
forbearance (Kshaanti), and straightforwardness
(Aarjavam) --- and expressing them in all his relationships
with the world outside is the life-long duty of a Brahmana.
1269
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The above-mentioned six artistic strokes complete the
picture of a Brahmana on the stage of the world when he
deals with things and beings in the various situations in
life. The Lord enumerates, in the stanza, three more duties
of a Brahmana which are the rules of conduct controlling
his spiritual life.
KNOWLEDGE (Jnaanam) --- The theoretical knowledge of
the world, of the structure of the equipments-of-
experience and their behaviour while coming in contact
with the outer world, of the highest goal of life, of the
nature of the spirit --- in short, knowledge of all that the
Upanishads deal with --- is included in the term Jnaanam.
WISDOM (Vijnaanam) --- If 'theoretical knowledge' is
Jnaanam then 'personal experience' is Vijnaanam.
Knowledge digested and assimilated brings home to man
an inward experience, and thereafter, he comes to live his
life guided by this deep inner experience called "wisdom."
Knowledge can be imparted, but "wisdom" is to be found
by the individual in himself. When a student discovers in
himself the enthusiasm to live the knowledge gained
through his studies, then from the field of his lived
experience arises "wisdom" --- Vijnaanam.
FAITH (Aastikyam) --- Unless one has a deep faith in what
one has studied and lived, the living itself will not be
enthusiastic and full. This ardency of conviction which is
the motive-force behind one who lives what he has
understood, is the secret sustaining power that steadily
1270
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
converts KNOWLEDGE into "wisdom." This inner order,
this intellectual honesty, this subtle unflagging
enthusiasm, is called "FAITH."
To grow and steadily cultivate knowledge, wisdom and
faith are the sacred duties of a Brahmana in his spiritual
life.
WHAT ARE THE DUTIES OF A 'KSHATRIYA?'
43. Prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity, and also not fleeing
from battle, generosity, lordliness --- these are the duties of the
KSHATRIYAS, born of (their own) nature.
The Kshatriyas have a greater dose of Rajoguna in the
composition of their personality. A Kshatriya is not defined
by Lord Krishna as the lawful son of another Kshatriya. He
enumerates a series of qualities and behaviours noticed in
a truly Kshatriya personality. In the Geeta, the four "castes"
are described in terms of their manifested individuality
when coming in contact with the world-of-objects --- the
field of expression. In all these descriptions we meet with
details of the individual's mental and intellectual reactions
to his moral life.
PROWESS AND BOLDNESS (Shauryam and Tejah) ---
These mean the vigour and constancy with which he
meets the challenges in his life. He who has the above two
1271
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
qualities, heroism and vigour of pursuit, certainly
becomes a commanding personality.
FORTITUDE (Dhriti) --- This is already explained in
earlier stanzas. Herein, as applied to a Kshatriya, it is the
powerful will of the personality, who, having decided to
do something, pursues the "path" and discovers in himself
the necessary drive and constancy of purpose to meet, and
if necessary, break down all the obstacles until he gains
victory or success.
PROMPTITUDE (Daakshyam) --- The Sanskrit equivalent
for the army parade-ground command "Attention" is
"Daksha!" This quality of alertness and smart vigilance is,
indeed, Daakshyam. In the context here, it means that a
Kshatriya is prompt in coming to decisions and in
executing them. Such an individual is industrious and has
an enviable amount of perseverance, however hazardous
may the field of his activity be.
NOT FLEEING FROM BATTLE --- One who has all the
above qualities can never readily accept defeat in any field
of conflict. He will not leave any work incomplete. Since
Krishna is here generally classifying all human beings
according to the gunas predominant in them, these terms
should be understood in their greatest amplitude of
suggestion. No doubt, a true warrior should not step back
in any field of battle; but such literal interpretation is only
incomplete. The field-of-battle should include all fields of
competition wherein things and situations arrange
1272
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
themselves in opposition to the planned schemes of a man
of will and dash. In no such condition will a true Kshatriya
feel nervous. He never leaves a field which he has entered;
if at all he leaves, he leaves with the crown of success!
GENEROSITY (Daanam) --- Governments or kings cannot
be popular unless they loosen their purse-strings. Even in
modern days every government budget in all democratic
countries has amounts allocated under heads which are
not discussed and voted. A man of action cannot afford to
be miserly since his success will depend upon his
influence on a large number of friends and supporters.
The glory of a prince is in his compassion for others who
are in need of help.
LORDLINESS (Ishwara-bhaava) --- As a rule, without self-
confidence in one's own abilities one cannot lead others. A
leader must have such a firm faith in himself that he will
be able to reinforce other frail hearts around him with his
self-confidence. Thus, lordliness is one of the essential
traits in a Kshatriya. He must waft all around a fragrance
of brilliance and dynamism, electrifying the atmosphere
around him. A king is not made by his golden robes or be-
jewelled crown. The crown, the robe and the throne have a
knack of electing for themselves a true wearer. Lordliness
is the hallmark of Kshatriya.
These eight qualities --- bravery, vigour, constancy,
resourcefulness, promptitude, courage in the face of the
enemy, generosity and lordliness --- are enumerated here
1273
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
as the duties of a Kshatriya, meaning that it is the duty of a
true man-of-action to cultivate, to maintain and to express
these traits in himself. In no society can leaders of men
and affairs claim to be at once the spiritual leaders of the
people. Secular heads cannot be spiritual guides. But a
true leader is one who has the subtle ability to incorporate
the spiritual ideals of our culture into the work-a-day life
and maintain them in the community in all its
innumerable fields of activity.
THE DUTIES OF THE VAISHYAS AND SHUDRAS ARE
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING:
44. Agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade are the duties of the
VAISHYAS, born of (their own) nature; and service is the duty
of the SHUDRAS, born of (their own) nature.
Since each mind-intellect equipment is governed and
ruled over by its predominating quality (guna), each
equipment has its own nature to reckon with. A vehicle
that can efficiently work in one medium of transport
cannot with the same efficiency work in another medium,
a car is efficient on the road --- but on water? The Rajasic
mind cannot fly into meditation and maintain its poise as
easily and as beautifully as the Sattwic mind can.
Similarly, in the field in which a Kshatriya can outshine
everybody, a Vaishya or a Shudra cannot. To rise to the
highest station in social life all men cannot have
IDENTICAL opportunities. A social system can only give
1274
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"equal opportunities" for all its members to develop their
gifts in and through life. In order to prove this thesis, the
various duties are prescribed that will help to mould the
personalities of the different types of men.
AGRICULTURE, BREEDING AND TENDING CATTLE,
TRADE AND COMMERCE --- These are three fields in
which a Vaishya can function inspiredly and exhaust his
imperfections. These are duties towards which he has an
aptitude because of his own nature. Work in a spirit of
DEDICATION AND SERVICE IS THE DUTY OF A
SHUDRA.
The mental temperament of a man determines what class
he belongs to and each class has been given particular
duties to perform in the world. If a man who is fit
temperamentally for one type of work is entrusted with a
different type of activity, he will bring chaos not only into
the field but also in himself. For example, if a Kshatriya
were asked to fan someone in a spirit of service, he may
condescend to do so, but one will find him ordering
somebody else, almost instinctively, to fetch a fan for him!
So too, if a man of commercial temperament, a Vaishya,
comes to serve as a temple-priest, the sacred place will
become, ere long, worse than a trading centre; and again,
let him become the head of any government, he will, out
of sheer instinct, begin doing profitable "business" from
the seat of governmental authority; people call it
corruption!!
1275
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
We must analyse and discover the type of vasanas and
temperaments that predominate in each one of us and
determine what types of men we are. None belonging to
the higher groups has any justification to look down with
contempt upon others who are of the lower types. Each
one serves the society as best as he can. Each one must
work in a spirit of dedication for his own evolution and
sense of fulfilment. When each one works thus according
to his vasanas and fully devotes his attention to his
prescribed duties, it is said here that he will develop
within himself and attain, in stages, the ultimate
Perfection.
When a person works devotedly, in the proper field and
in the environment best suited to him, he will be
exhausting the existing vasanas in him. And when the
vasanas are reduced he will experience tranquillity and
peace within and it will become possible for him to
discover more and more concentration and single-pointed
contemplation.
WITH THESE FACULTIES IN HIM MAN CAN
ULTIMATELY REACH THE STATE OF PERFECTION ---
THE LIFE IN THE SELF --- HOW?
45. Devoted, each to his own duty, man attains Perfection. How,
engaged in his own duty, he attains Perfection, listen.
1276
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
EACH DEVOTED TO HIS DUTY, MAN ATTAINS
PERFECTION --- By being loyal to our own level of
feelings and ideas, to our own development of
consciousness, we can evolve into higher states of self-
unfoldment.
The truth of this classification of mankind may not be very
obvious, if we observe it only superficially. But the
biographies of all great men of action declare repeatedly
the precision with which this law-of-life works itself out in
human affairs. A tiny Corsican boy who was asked to tend
sheep refused to do so and reached Paris to become one of
the greatest generals the world had ever seen ---
Napoleon. A Goldsmith or a Keats would rather compose
his metres in a garret than take up a commercial job,
courting prosperity and a life of comfort. Each one is
ordered by his own Swabhaava, and each can discover his
fulfilment only in that self-ordered field of activity.
By thus working in the field ordered by one's own vasanas,
if one can live surrendering one's ego and ego-centric
desires to enjoy the fruits, one can achieve a sense of
fulfilment; and a great peace will arise out of the
exhaustion of one's vasanas. The renunciation of the ego
and its desires can never be accomplished unless there is a
spirit of dedication and a total surrender to the Infinite.
When unbroken awareness of the Lord becomes a
constant habit of the mind, dedication becomes effective,
and man's evolution starts.
1277
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Such an intelligent classification of human beings on the
basis of their physical behaviour, psychological structure
and intellectual aptitude is applicable not in India only.
This four-fold classification is universal, both in its
application in life and its implication in the cultural
development of man.
HOW CAN ONE, DEVOTED TO ONES OWN DUTY,
ATTAIN PERFECTION? "THAT DO THOU HEAR,"
SAYS LORD KRISHNA:
46. From Whom is the evolution of all beings, by Whom all this
is pervaded, worshipping Him with one's own duty, man
attains Perfection.
In this chapter the four-fold classification of men and the
duties of the individuals belonging to each classification
are given. When a man acts according to his "nature"
(Swabhaava) and station-in-life (Swadharma), his vasanas get
exhausted. This exhaustion of the load of vasanas and the
consequent sense of joy and relief can be gained only
when he learns to work and achieve in a spirit of total self-
surrender.
By constantly remembering the higher goal towards
which we are working our way, if we do our work
efficiently, this vasana-exhaustion takes place. The goal to
be constantly remembered is indicated in this stanza: "HE
FROM WHOM ALL BEINGS ARISE AND BY WHOM
1278
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ALL THIS IS PERVADED." The three equipments --- the
body, the mind and the intellect, that flutter out into
activity, are all in themselves inert matter with no
consciousness in themselves. It is only at the touch of the
Light-of-Life that inert matter starts singing its vasanas
through the various activities.
To remember constantly, this Consciousness, the Atman ---
the Atman that lends, as it were, Its dynamism to the
Matter that invests It in its activities --- is to stand apart
from all agitations in the field of strife. Just as a musician,
constantly conscious of the background drone, sings his
songs easily in tune, just as a dancer dances effortlessly to
the rhythm of the drum, such a man is never caught on
the wrong foot ever in life. A new glow of tranquil peace
and dynamic love comes to shine through all his actions,
and his achievements radiate the shadowless Light-of-
Perfection, unearthly and Divine.
Work can thus be changed into worship by attuning our
minds all through our activity to the consciousness of the
Self. A self-dedicated man so working in the
consciousness of the Supreme pays the greatest homage to
his Creator. This subtle change in attitude transforms the
shape of even the most dreary situation. Even the most
dreadfully unpleasant field of activity is converted into a
sacred chamber of devotion --- into a silent hall of prayer -
-- into a quiet seat of meditation!
1279
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
By thus setting one's hands and feet to work in the field-
of-objects with one's mind and intellect held constantly
conscious of the Divine Presence, one can attain
"THROUGH THE PERFORMANCE OF ONE'S OWN
DUTIES THE HIGHEST PERFECTION." Work results in
self-fulfilment, apart from its legitimate "fruits." The inner
personality gets integrated, and such an integrated person
grows in his meditation and evolves quickly.
"AND YET, WHY SHOULD I NOT GO AND
MEDITATE?" SEEMS TO BE THE HONEST DOUBT IN
ARJUNA'S MIND. KRISHNA ANSWERS:
47. Better is one's own duty (though) destitute of merits, than
the duty of another well-performed. He who does the duty
ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.
The opening line of this stanza has been exhaustively
discussed earlier (III-35). To work in any field ordered by
one's own vasanas is better, because in that case, there is a
chance for exhausting the existing vasanas. When an
individual strives in a field contrary to the existing
vasanas, he not only fails to gain any exhaustion of the
existing vasanas, but also creates a new load of vasanas in
his temperament. Hence, it is said here: "BETTER IS
ONE'S OWN DHARMA THOUGH IMPERFECT THAN
THE DHARMA OF ANOTHER WELL-PERFORMED."
1280
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
By performing "duties ordained by one's own nature"
(Swabhaava-Niyatam-Karma) the individual comes to no
evil --- meaning, the individual has no chance of
imprinting any new impressions on his mind --- the
impressions which, in their maturity, might force him to
strive, to seek, to achieve and to indulge.
This closing chapter of the Geeta is a peroration of the
beautiful discourse of the inspired Divine, and it is,
naturally therefore, a summary of the whole Geeta. Hence,
we find here a reiteration of almost all the salient ideas
which have been discussed earlier, and which are very
important for the cure of the "Arjuna-disease.
Anyone can appreciate the logic of it if he considers the
following: (1) the deadly poison in the fangs of a serpent
never kills the serpent; (2) living organisms crawling in
fermented wine never get drunk; (3) the malarial germs in
the mosquitoes do not attack them with shivering fevers.
THE SWABHAAVA OF EACH ONE CANNOT DESTROY
HIM! If the poison is drawn from the fangs and wine is
poisoned, the crawling organisms die. Similarly, if the
Kshatriyas were to perform the duties prescribed for the
Brahmana-type of equipment, they would be only doing
harakiri. Arjuna was a Kshatriya; hence retiring from the
battle-field to a jungle for meditation would have
destroyed him.
In short, it is no use employing our minds in fields which
are contrary to our nature. Everyone has a precise place in
1281
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the scheme of created things. Each one has his own
importance and none is to be despised, for, each can do
something which the others cannot do so well. There is no
redundancy in the Lord's creation; not even a single blade
of grass, anywhere, at any time, is unnecessarily created!
Everything has a purpose. Not only the good but the bad
also are His manifestations and serve His purpose. The
Pandavas' glory is, no doubt, great, but the manifestation
of the wickedness in the Kauravas is also the glory of His
creation. Without the latter, the history of the former
would not have been complete. Nothing is to be
condemned; none to be despised. Every thing is He. And
He alone IS.
BUT IF THE DUTY TO WHICH WE ARE BOUND IS
RIDDLED WITH EVIL, ARE WE TO FOLLOW IT?
KRISHNA ANSWERS:
48. One should not abandon, O Kaunteya, the duty to which
one is born, though faulty; for, are not all undertakings
enveloped by evil, as fire by smoke?
After explaining this much about the nature (Swabhaava)
and the corresponding station-in-life (Swadharma), Krishna
builds up the idea to a subtle climax. His advice is general
and it is meant for all people, of all times, in all situations.
Even when the work so ordained by the existing vasanas
1282
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
(Sahajam Karma) is full of evil (Sadosham), Krishna's advice
is that one should not relinquish it (Na-Tyajet).
Superficially reading this declaration in a hurry, one is apt
to think that this is not spirituality. But to a careful
thinker, the term "born with" (Sahajam) solves the riddle.
There is an ocean of difference between the meanings of
the phrases "BORN WITH" and "BORN INTO."
There are two forces that control and guide, define and
determine, our actions --- (i) the impulses brought forth by
the pressure of the mental temperaments within; and (ii)
the pressure of environments that tickles new temptations
in ourselves. One is to follow faithfully, the subjective
vasanas, even if they be defective. But at the same time, we
must courageously renounce all the demands that the
objective world makes upon us from without.
The vasanas one is BORN WITH are to be lived through,
without ego and desire; while the vasana-creating
atmosphere INTO which one is born should not be
allowed to contaminate one's personality. Krishna is very
careful in indicating that a spiritual seeker must
constantly strive hard to stand apart from the shackling
effects of the environments. According to the Geeta, man
is the master of circumstances. To the extent he comes to
assert this mastery, to that extent he is evolved.
IN FACT, "ARE NOT ALL ACTIONS (WORKS)
CLOUDED BY DEFECTS, AS FIRE IS BY THE SMOKE?"
1283
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here the term used to indicate "work" (Arambha) is very
important. This Sanskrit term Arambha means "beginning."
The term was used earlier (XII-16) where also we were
asked to "RENOUNCE THE SENSE OF AGENCY IN
ACTIVITY." When there is an ego-centric sense of self-
arrogation, the "I-am-the-self" arrogation, the "I-am-the-
doer" sense, there is, invariably, creation of new vasanas
and therefore, it is full of defects (Dosha).
This defect is as unavoidable as the appearance of smoke
in fire. The more an oven is ventilated in the atmospheric
air, the less smoky becomes the fire burning therein. The
more our inner bosom is ventilated with the
Consciousness Divine, the less will the ego assert, and
therefore, no defects can pollute the actions. If there be an
influx of wrong vasanas within, the earlier we exhaust
them through "action" --- without any ego or ego-centric
desire of enjoying their fruits --- the quicker shall the load
of existing vasanas be lifted from our personality.
WHAT IS THE BENEFIT OF THUS ACTING
ACCORDING TO THE TEMPERAMENTS WITH WHICH
ONE IS BORN?
49. He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has
subdued his self, from whom desire has fled, he, through
renunciation, attains the Supreme State of Freedom-from-
action.
1284
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It must be remembered, that the entire Geeta is addressed
to Prince Arjuna standing confused at the immensity of
his duty. He wants to run away into the jungle and live in
a spirit of what he understands as 'renunciation.' Lord
Krishna's thesis in the entire Geeta is that a MERE running
away from life and its duties is not Samnyasa nor is it
renunciation. Here, in the stanza, the Lord is defining the
State-of-Actionlessness (Naishkarmya-Siddhi). This state is
reached when we do not identify ourselves with the
equipments-of-matter which are the instruments-of-
perception, the three instruments of false interpretation of
Truth (Body, Mind and Intellect). To regain our life in
Pure Consciousness is the Supreme State.
When we forget our spiritual dignity, the misconception
of the ego arises; we lose our real personality and come to
believe that we are merely the limited ego. Such self-
forgetfulness can be observed in any drunken reveller. He
forgets his individual personality and status in life and
assumes to himself a false identity and continues to be in
it as long as he is in a state of intoxication. In his false
concept of himself the drunken fool acts, disgracing his
education and station in life.
The ego arises when we are ignorant and forgetful of our
spiritual nature. When this 'ignorance'is ended, there is
the experience of the Infinite Bliss of the All-Full-
Consciousness. Naturally, there is no want felt, and
therefore, no desire can arise. When desires are absent, the
thought-breedings end. When thoughts are dried up,
1285
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
actions, which are the parade of thoughts, marching out
through the archway of the body, are no more. This state
is called "ACTIONLESSNESS" --- Naishkarmya Siddhi.
The Supreme State described so elaborately in the
Upanishadic literature and indicated here by the technical
term 'Naishkarmya-Siddhi,' is that 'WISE' state-of-being
wherein there is no 'ignorance.' DESIRES are the children
of 'ignorance'; THOUGHTS arise from desires; ACTIONS
are thoughts expressed in the outer world. In the spirituo-
psychology of Vedanta we may thus say that 'ignorance'is
the great-grandfather of action! With the 'knowledge' of
the Spirit, 'ignorance'ends, and in that State, thoughts and
actions cannot be. This is the State of Full Awakening, and
with reference to its previous condition as expressed and
manifested through the body, this condition is indicated
as "ACTIONLESS-NESS" or "THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or
"DESIRELESS-NESS."
The Geetaacharya, in this stanza, declares that this State of
Perfection, defined as the State of Actionlessness, cannot
be gained by a cheap and ignominious escape from the
fields of life's activities. Making use of the fields, we must
gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas,
through selfless activities. Making use of the fields, we
must gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas,
through selfless activities which are prescribed to each one
of us according to the type to which we naturally belong.
Arjuna being a "Kshatriya", his duty is to fight; and by
fighting alone will he exhaust his vasanas. By the
1286
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
exhaustion of the vasanas alone can one hope to reach the
Supreme State of Pure Awareness.
AN UNDERSTANDING UNATTACHED EVERYWHERE
(Asakta-Buddhih Sarvatra) --- An intellect that is attached to
sensuous things of the world outside knows no peace
within itself. It gets agitated and the frail body gets
shattered as the fuming mind escapes through it in its
hunt for satisfaction among the sense-objects. A 'clean-
shaven intellect,' devoid of all the cobwebs of attachments
with the equipments of perceptions, feeling and thinking,
and their respective objects perceived, felt or thought of, is
the vehicle that stands dissolved, revealing THAT which
pulsates through them all. This is the true State-of-
Actionlessness and a man who has earlier disciplined his
intellect alone can attain it.
In the case of Arjuna, his tall talks of detachment and
renunciation were false urges of escapism paraded as an
angelic urge. His Samnyasa arose out of his "attachment" to
his kith and kin, while true Samnyasa must arise out of
"detachment."
ONE WHO HAS SUBDUED HIS EGO (Jitaatmaa) --- An
intellect of complete detachment is an impossible dream.
The seeker subdues his heart which ever seeks its
flickering joys in sense-gratifications. This self-mastery of
the mind is impossible as long as there are even the
minutest traces of desire in him. One from whom all
desires have fled (Vigata-sprihah) alone can subdue the
1287
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mind, and such a seeker alone can accomplish the state of
complete detachment of his intellect from the world of
sense-objects.
Mind is the seat of all vanities of agency, like "I am the
doer" sense (Kartritwa-bhaavanaa). The intellect is the seat
of all false arrogations that "I-am-the-enjoyer" (Bhoktritwa-
bhavanaa). These two together make up the ego, and it is
fed, nurtured and nourished by its clinging attachments
(spriha) to the joy that is in the objects of the world outside.
By correct analysis and investigations, when the "spriha" is
dried up, both the senses of enjoyership and doership will
get steadily sublimated, leaving behind the Infinite
experience of the Self. The Geeta is never tired of
repeating that self-restraint and freedom from desire are
the unavoidable pre-requisites for spiritual growth.
Herein, we have a beautiful example of explaining the
Supreme Goal, not in achieving any Higher State, but as
the state of complete detachment from the lower urges.
FREEDOM FROM ACTION IS A CONDITION IN
WHICH ALONE THE EXPERIENCES OF THE SUPREME
BEING CAN RUSH IN. HOW? LEARN THIS FROM ME
IN BRIEF:
50. How he, who has attained perfection, reaches BRAHMAN
(the Eternal) , that in brief do you learn from Me, O! Kaunteya,
that Supreme State-of-Knowledge.
1288
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here we are told how to get detached from the wrong
tendencies in life, and how, to that extent, we attain
serenity and composure. Detachment from matter-
hallucinations itself is the rediscovery of the spiritual
beauty. The following few stanzas make a beautiful
section of this chapter which refreshingly reminds us of
the various descriptions of a Man-of-Perfection that were
given earlier, throughout the Lord's Song. When we thus
get purified, meaning, when the intellect becomes free
from its attachments, and the mind and body come well
under the control of the intellect, then alone are we fit for
the "Path-of-Meditation," which is the process of
accomplishing and fulfilling renunciation of the lower,
base, ego-sense.
It is not possible to renounce all attachments completely,
unless one experiences the Truth, and thereby becomes
the Infinite Self. Our attempt now is to reduce our
attachments to the irreducible minimum, leaving but the
thinnest film of 'ignorance'veiling the Supreme. Krishna
says here, "LEARN THAT FROM ME IN BRIEF, O, son of
Kunti, how to remove this last lingering film of
'ignorance'and thereby get permanently established in that
Supreme God-consciousness, which is the Self."
THE TECHNIQUE-OF-MEDITATION IS BEING
DESCRIBED NOW; THIS AND THE FOLLOWING TWO
STANZAS EXPLAIN WHAT SHOULD BE THE
CONDITION OF THE EQUIPMENTS OF PERCEPTION,
1289
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FEELING, AND THINKING AT THE TIME OF PERFECT
MEDITATION:
51. Endowed with a pure intellect; controlling the self by
firmness; relinquishing sound and other objects; and
abandoning attraction and hatred;
ENDOWED WITH PURE UNDERSTANDING --- An
intellect that has grown to remain without vaasanaas. An
intellect that has thus purified itself of all its tendencies of
joy-hunting is indicated here as pure (Vishuddha)
understanding.
CONTROLLING THE MIND AND THE SENSE WITH
FORTITUDE --- These two sabotage the harmony and
balance in a meditator when he is at his seat of meditation.
At that moment the sense-organs receive a rush of stimuli
with which they can disturb the music of meditation in the
mind; or, often the mind can topple down from its steady
concentration, by itself remembering its own experiences
of the past. By controlling both these, which were earlier
described as Shama and Dama, the seeker comes to tune
himself up properly. He becomes invulnerable to all such
attacks.
The idea of controlling the mind and sense-organs
described in the earlier epithet is clearly elucidated in the
second line of the stanza. RENOUNCING SENSE-
OBJECTS --- controlling the sense-organs means allowing
1290
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
none of the stimuli such as sound, form, touch, taste or
smell to infiltrate through their respective gateways of
ears, eyes, skin, tongue and the nose. When thus a
complete wall-of-understanding has been built around the
mind, protecting it from any onslaught from the outer
world, the mind can, of its own accord, either dance in
some REMEMBERED joy, or sob in grief at some
EXPECTED sorrow --- because of its likes and dislikes,
loves and hates. Therefore, these instinctive impulses of
the mind are also to be controlled.
To summarise, a meditator is one who has: (1) an intellect
purified of all its extrovert desires; (2) a mind, together
with the sense-organs, brought well under the control of
this intellect, so purified; (3) the sense-organs no more
contacting the sense-objects; and (4) a mind that has given
up its ideas of likes and dislikes. It is this individual who
becomes a successful meditator.
AGAIN:
52. Dwelling in solitude; eating but little; speech, body and
mind subdued; always engaged in meditation and
concentration; taking refuge in dispassion;
DWELLING IN SOLITUDE (Vivikta-Sevee) --- A seeker
who has developed all the above-mentioned physical,
mental and intellectual adjustments, must now seek a
sequestered spot of loneliness. This does not mean that he
1291
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
must move out of a town to a jungle. The term indicates
only a spot "wherein there is the least disturbance." Even
in the midst of a market there are moments when it is
deserted and quiet. If the seeker is sincere, he can discover
such moments of complete solitude under his own roof.
EATING BUT LITTLE --- Over-indulgence and stuffing
oneself with highly nutritive food is fattening the body
and thickening the subtlety of one's intellectual activities.
Temperance is the law for all spiritual students (VI-17).
CONTROLLING SPEECH, BODY AND MIND --- The
mind cannot be subdued unless the body is brought under
its command. The body is constituted of the sense-organs
of perception and action. The grossest manifestation of the
mind is action, and to control action is to discipline the
mind. The term SPEECH used here indicates "all sense-
organs-of-action and their functions"; and the term BODY
represents "the organs-of-perception and all their activities
of perceiving their respective objects." Unless these two
sets of organs are controlled, the mind cannot be subdued.
In fact, the mind ITSELF, at the body-level, becomes the
sense-organs, and the mind projected away from the body
is the great universe of sense-objects. When the mind,
playing through the body, identifies itself with its own
projections --- the objects --- it is called PERCEPTION; and
when it comes in contact with the world-of-objects seeking
satisfaction and entertainment, it is called ACTION.
Disciplining action and regulating perception --- in short,
1292
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
eliminating the ego-centric attitude in all our perceptions,
in all our relationships with the world-of-objects, is what
is advised here.
EVER ENGAGED IN MEDITATION --- Controlling the
actions and perceptions of the mind is not possible as long
as the mind is constantly flowing out through the sense-
organs towards the sense-objects. Seeking sense-
gratifications, the mind is in a constant state of agitation.
To quieten such a mind, it is necessary that we must give
it some "point-of-contemplation" wherein, as it engages
itself more and more, it shall discover consummate
happiness and get sufficiently disengaged from
everything else. Diverting the mind from the world of
sense-objects and maintaining it in a steady flow towards
contemplation of the Lord in an utter attitude of
identification, is called MEDITATION. To be steadily in a
state of such an all-consuming dedication unto a nobler
and higher ideal is the method of cooling down the mind's
boiling lust for sense-enjoyments.
POSSESSED OF DISPASSION --- Dispassion is Vairaagya.
It is not a mere self-denial of any object of enchantment,
but it is a state when the mind rebounds upon itself from
the objects as a result of its discovery that the objects
contain no glow of happiness. The essence of dispassion is
not in our running away from the object; from a truly dis-
passionate man, the objects run away in inexplicable
despair.
1293
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When the old interests of a person die away and when he
is ordered by new intellectual visions, new interests rise
up in his mind; then the old world-of-objects around him
suddenly retires, yielding place to the new set of things
that he has willed around him by his newly developed
mind. As long as I was a vicious man, sensuous friends
and pleasure-seekers crowded my drawing-room; when I
changed my way-of-life and took to serious social work
and political activities, the group of idlers went away
yielding their places to politicians and social workers.
After a time I grew in my mental make-up, and so, in my
spiritual interests, even these politicians with their power-
politics, and the social workers with their unspeakable
jealousies and rivalries retired, yielding their places to
men of thought and spiritual benediction. This is a typical
example of how, as a mind grows, it leaves its old toys
behind and enters totally into a greater field of the nobler
gains of life.
To sum up, a true seeker of the Higher Life must seek
solitude, live in temperance, subdue his speech, body and
mind, and must live in a spirit of dispassion, a true life of
aspiration to heave himself towards the ideal.
THESE EFFORTS CAN BUILD UP A TEMPLE OF
SUCCESS ONLY WHEN THE INNER PERSONALITY
HAS A DEEP FOUNDATION UPON CERTAIN
ENDURING VALUES OF LIFE. THESE ARE
ENUMERATED IN THE FOLLOWING:
1294
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
53. Having abandoned egoism, power, arrogance, desire, anger
and aggrandisement, and freed from the notion of 'mine, ' and
so peaceful --- he is fit to become BRAHMAN.
If the preceding verse indicated things that are to be
acquired and brought about in the relatively outer
surfaces of the meditator's personality, here we have a list
of things which are to be renounced from the inner core of
the meditator's personality. Here are the enduring values-
of-life a meditator must learn to live.
The items enumerated in the stanza are not, in fact, so
many different items, but they are all different
manifestations of one and the same wrong notion, namely
the "I-act-mentality" (Ahamkara). When this "sense-of-
agency" develops, ego-centric vanities intensify within our
bosom, and they manifest as "power" (Balam) --- the
"power" to strive and struggle, sweat and strain, to fulfil
passions and desires. A powerful ego will, with each
success in the sensuous world, gather to itself more and
more "pride," or "arrogance" (Darpam).
To an individual personality, working under the influence
of both "power" and "arrogance," "lust and anger" (Kaama
and Krodha) are but natural, and thereafter, he becomes a
mad machine of restlessness within and of disturbances
around, ever anxiously bearing himself down upon the
society in order that he may, by means fair or foul,
1295
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
acquire, possess and aggrandise the objects of his fancy,
indicated here by the term "aggrandisement" (Parigraha).
The six items listed above are nothing but manifestations
of the "sense-of-agency" --- the 'I-act-mentality'
(Ahamkaara). Krishna asks the meditator to forsake these
and thus to immediately become egoless (Nirmamah) and
peaceful (Shaantah). This is not the peace of the grave nor
the quiet of the desert; this is the peace that arises out of
the fullness
of 'wisdom,' out of our absolute satisfaction experienced
in the Realm-of-Perfection.
All restlessness is caused by the ego and its onward rush
towards finite objects, seeking among the ephemeral, a
satisfaction and joy that is permanent and enduring.
When this sense-of-agency and endless seeking of sense-
gratifications have been renounced, the seeker (saadhaka)
experiences a relative quiet within his bosom. He who is
tuned thus, through understanding and discipline, can
discover in himself the required balance and equipoise to
rocket his total personality into the higher climbs of
"conscious unfoldment." The stanza does not say that such
an individual has reached Perfection, but it definitely says
that "HE IS FIT TO BECOME BRAHMAN." The above is
but a preliminary preparation for the final realisation.
WHAT THEN IS THE NEXT STAGE OF
DEVELOPMENT? THE GEETA EXPLAINS:
1296
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
54. Becoming BRAHMAN, serene in the Self, he neither
grieves nor desires; the same to all beings, he obtains a supreme
devotion towards Me.
After liquidating the ego and its manifestations ---
enumerated in the preceding stanza as power, pride, lust,
passion and sense of possession --- the seeker comes to
experience a relatively greater peace within, as he is
released from all the confusions generally created by the
psychological mal-adjustments and intellectual false
evaluations of life. This newly discovered inner
tranquillity, no doubt artificially propped up for the time
being by severe self-discipline, should be positively
reinforced by definite efforts and constant vigilance.
With constant self-effort, relative peace in the mind is to
be maintained for longer periods of time and zealously
guarded. Joys and sorrows will be constantly reaching our
bosom from the outer world; we are helpless before them.
For, even when the "sense-of-agency" has been renounced,
the other aspect of the ego, "I-enjoy-mentality" (Bhoktritwa-
bhaavanaa) will assert itself and poison the mind of the
meditator. A worm cut into two pieces becomes two
separate, independent living worms ere long. So too, if
one aspect of the ego, the "I-do-mentality" is conquered,
we must equally attend to the destruction of the other
aspect of the ego, the "I-enjoy-mentality;" or else, the
surviving part will revive within a very short time and we
shall discover a healthier ego, potentially more powerful,
1297
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dangerously rising out of the seemingly dead
individuality.
One who has read well, reflected upon and understood
the theme of the Absolute Reality as discussed in the
Scriptures, is indicated here by the term "Brahma-Bhootah."
This word employed in this verse should not be construed
as "one who has become Brahman." It can only mean "one
who has convinced oneself of the existence and nature of
the Reality as discussed in the Scriptures." Once this
Spiritual Truth is understood, the student necessarily
becomes less agitated, because, all disturbances enter our
life through our identification with the equipments-of-
experiences only. To the extent an intellect realises the
existence of the diviner aspect in it, and so automatically
withdraws its all-out clinging to the matter-realm, to that
extent it is not disturbed by the objects of perception,
feeling and thought. Thus it discovers a growing
tranquillity (Prasannaatmaa) within itself.
A seeker who has gained the "knowledge" of Brahman
through STUDY, and make it his own through
REFLECTION, gains the tranquillity of composure as a
result of his understanding, and therefore experiences a
partial liquidation of his ego-sense. Thereby he discovers
in himself the courage to stand apart, both from grief and
desire. He grieves not (Na Shochati) because he feels no
incompleteness in himself, as he used to feel in the earlier
days of his arrogant ego. Since there is no sense of
imperfection, his intellect no longer spins new and novel
1298
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
plans for satisfactions and temporary gratifications, which
are called desires. Naturally, one who grieves not in life
desires not (Na Kaankshati) for the possession of anything
to make his happiness complete.
A tranquil seeker --- who, in his understanding, comes to
desire nothing and has developed an independent source
of happiness which is free from the presence of the
absence of any external environment --- lives in the world,
with a totally new set of values of life, in which, according
to him, there is nothing but the constant experience of the
Divine presence. Naturally, he develops an equanimity of
vision (V-18, 19 and 20).
THIS TYPE OF AN INDIVIDUAL ATTAINS SUPREME
DEVOTION UNTO ME --- Earlier, an entire chapter has
been devoted to the discussion on devotion (Ch. XII)
wherein we found that, according to the Scripture,
devotion is measured by our sense of identification with
the Higher Ideal. In order to identify with the Infinite
Truth, the seeker must have a definite amount of
detachment from his usual channels of dissipation, both in
the outer world and the realms within.
The previous verse indicated the methods of detachment
and it was said that he who has accomplished them in his
inner composition is the only one who is capable of
striving for and succeeding in a true identification with
the play of the Infinite in and through the finite. The
expansiveness of vision, the catholicity of love and the
1299
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
release from sense preoccupation --- all these are
necessary in order to produce in the seeker, supreme love
for the Lord. There is yet another stage in one's pilgrimage
to Truth.
WHAT THEN IS THE NEXT STAGE?
55. By devotion he knows Me in Essence, what and who I am;
then, having known Me in My Essence, he forthwith enters into
the Supreme.
BY DEVOTION HE COMES TO KNOW ME --- Devotion,
as we have explained, is "love for the Supreme." Love is
measured by the degree of identification the lover
maintains with the beloved. When an ego-centric
individuality, having made all the above adjustments,
increasingly seeks and discovers its identity with the Self,
it comes to experience the true nature of the Self more and
more clearly. Such a seeker comes to understand "WHAT
AND WHO I AM."
In the entire Geeta, the first person singular is used by the
Lord to indicate the Supreme Goal. It is not Lord Krishna,
as an individual person who is indicated by the terms 'I'
and 'Me' as used in these discourses. Remember, this is the
Lord's own Song, sung to revive His devotees, and the
pronouns used here represent the Paramatman. To know
the Self means to know both Its nature and identity. These
are the topics in all scriptures. But the scriptural study
1300
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
gives us only an intellectual comprehension of Truth and
not its Essence (Tattwatah), a spiritual apprehension of
Truth as a lived experience.
THEN, HAVING KNOWN ME IN ESSENCE --- When
this experience comes through a slow and steady
unfoldment of the Light of Consciousness, through the
dropping of the veils of 'ignorance'created by our
identifications with the body, we come to apprehend, IN
TOTO, the Infinite. The individuality or the ego, ends and
"HE THEREAFTER ENTERS ME."
The "ENTRY" mentioned here is not like that of a man
entering a structure, a house separate from himself. There
is no ego to enter into the plane of God-consciousness. The
term "ENTRY" is used here exactly in the same fashion as
"the dreamer ENTERS the waking state." The dreamer
cannot retain his own individuality when he ENTERS the
waking world, but he himself becomes the "waker."
Similarly, when the ego ENTERS God-consciousness, the
individuality cannot retain itself as such. The
misconception that he is an individual ends and he
rediscovers, becomes or awakens to, the Infinite
Brahmanhood --- the State of Krishna-Consciousness.
DEVOTION FOR THE LORD IS NEVER COMPLETE
WITHOUT SERVICE TO THE LIVING WORLD OF
CREATURES:
1301
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
56. Doing all actions, always taking refuge in Me, by My grace
he obtains the Eternal, Indestructible State or Abode.
The philosophy of the Geeta is extremely dynamic. The
Song of the Lord is an innocent-looking magazine of
power which can be detonated by correct understanding.
The warmth of living makes it explode, blasting the crust
of ignorance that has grown around the noble personality
and its divine possibilities in the student.
Devotion to the Lord (Bhakti), in the Geeta, is not a mere
passive surrender unto the ideal, nor a mere physical
ritualism. Lord Krishna insists, not only upon our
identification with the Higher through an intelligent
process of detachment, from both the senses, of
"AGENCY" and "ENJOYMENT," but also upon the
understanding and the inner experience positively
brought out in all our contacts with the outer world, in all
our relationships.
Religion, to Lord Krishna, is not fulfilled by a mere
withdrawal from the outer world of sense objects, but in a
definite come-back into the world, bringing into it the
fragrance of peace and joy of the yonder, to brighten and
beautify the drab, inert objects that constitute the world.
Therefore, after describing one who can be considered as
the higher devotee, in this stanza, Krishna now adds
another condition to be fulfilled by all seekers.
1302
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Geetaacharya never wants to receive any devotee at
His gate, nor will He give an audience to anyone, unless
the seeker caries the passport of self-less service to society
--- "PERFORMING CONTINUOUSLY ALL ACTIONS,
ALWAYS TAKING REFUGE IN ME."
In order to serve without the "sense-of-agency," the
practical method is "TAKE REFUGE IN ME." Such a
seeker, who is constantly working in fulfilling his
obligatory duties to society and towards himself has "My
grace" (Mat prasaada).
The Supreme has no existence apart from His Grace; He is
His Grace, His Grace is He. The Grace of the Self,
therefore, means more and more the play of divine
Consciousness in and through the personality layers in the
individual. In an individual, to the extent his mind and
intellect are available, in their discipline to be ruled over
by spiritual truth, to that extent he is under the blessing of
His Grace.
HE ATTAINS THE ETERNAL IMMUTABLE STATE ---
When thus working in the world, without the sense of
agency and enjoyment, the existing vasanas become
exhausted and the ego gets eliminated. Awakening thus
from the delusory projections of the ego, the individual
attains the State of Pure Consciousness and comes to live
thereafter the Eternal, Immortal State --- THE KRISHNA-
STATE OF PERFECTION.
1303
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the preceding three stanzas the "Paths" of Knowledge,
Devotion and Action are indicated, and in all of them the
same goal of realising the seeker's oneness with the
Supreme has been indicated. Integral saadhanaa is the core
of the Geeta technique. To synthesize the methods of
Work, Devotion and Knowledge is at once the discipline
of the body, mind, and intellect. For, all disciplines
PURSUED AT THE BODY LEVEL, in order to control the
mind and turn it towards the ideal, are called Karma Yoga;
all methods of channelising emotions in order to
DISCIPLINE THE MIND to contemplate upon the Higher
are called Bhakti Yoga and all study and reflection,
detachment and meditation, PRACTISED AT THE
INTELLECTUAL LEVEL, whereby, again the mind is
lifted to the realm of the silent experience of its own
Infinitude are called Jnaana Yoga. To practise all the three
during our life is to discipline all the three layers in us.
Thus, the philosophy of total spiritual transformation of
the perceiver, the feeler and the thinker, all at once, is the
prime contribution that the Geeta has to make to the
timeless tradition of the Hindu culture, as available for us
in the Upanishads.
THEREFORE:
57. Mentally renouncing all actions in Me, having Me as the
Highest Goal, resorting to the YOGA -of-discrimination, ever
fix your mind in Me.
1304
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
RESIGNING MENTALLY ALL DEEDS TO ME --- Both
the ego and the ego-centric anxieties for enjoying are to be
renounced at the altar of the Lord, and thus to act in the
world is the 'path,' through which a man of action reaches
the greater cultural climes. This idea of surrender has been
discussed earlier, very exhaustively. This spirit of
surrender can come only when the student has infinite
courage to maintain a steady aspiration for "HAVING ME
AS THE HIGHEST GOAL." The mind needs a positive
hold upon something, before it can be persuaded to leave
its present props.
RESORTING TO BUDDHI YOGA --- The intellect's main
function is discrimination. To discriminate the false from
the true, and to fix ourselves on the path of seeking the
true, is called Buddhi yoga. Controlling life and regulating
its movements through discrimination is Karma Yoga. And
thus the term 'Buddhi yoga' is an original coined-word, met
with only in the Geeta, to indicate in essence the "Path-of-
Selfless-Action." It has been used in the very early
portions of the Geeta and there it has been very
exhaustively explained.
PLEASE EVER FIX YOUR MIND UPON ME --- One who
has fixed Krishna - Tattwa as the goal of his life, one who
surrenders himself mentally at all times at this altar, and
serves all His creatures, one who ever discriminates and
avoids all undivine thoughts and ego-centric self-
assertions --- such a one alone can naturally come to fix his
thoughts constantly upon the Lord.
1305
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is an eternal law of mental life that "AS WE THINK SO
WE BECOME." A devotee who has thus come to live all
his activities in dedication to his goal, the Krishna-
Consciousness, must necessarily come to live as Krishna,
and experience the Eternal, Immutable, State of the Self.
SUPPOSING ONE REFUSES TO FOLLOW THIS
SEEMINGLY ARDUOUS 'PATH,' WHAT WOULD BE
HIS CONDITION? LISTEN:
58. Fixing your mind upon Me, you shall, by My grace,
overcome all obstacles, but if, from egoism, you will not hear
Me, you shall perish.
Lord Krishna, in essence, says: "By your thoughts,
renounce all your activities in Me." All activities in the
world are only expressions of the Divine Conscious-ness
flashing Its brilliance through the body. In all activities be
conscious of the Lord, without Whom no action is ever
possible. Keep Him as your Goal. Make your intellect
constantly aware of this "Lord of all actions." Gradually,
the mind and the body will begin to work under the
command of such an inspired intellect.
How will this constant remembrance of the Lord help?
This is now being answered. Krishna says: "HE, WHO
HAS COMPLETELY FIXED ALL HIS THOUGHTS UPON
ME, WILL CROSS OVER ALL DIFFICULTIES BY MY
GRACE." Most of our obstacles in life are imaginary ---
1306
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
created by false fears and deceitful anxieties of our own
confused mind. The "grace" referred to here is "the result
accrued in our mind when it is properly tuned up to and
peacefully settled in contemplation upon the Infinite." It
does not mean any special consideration shown by the all-
loving Lord to some rare persons of His own choice. The
Grace of the all-pervading is present everywhere because
Grace is His form. Just as the ever-present sunlight on a
bright day cannot illumine my room as long as the
windows are closed, so too, the harmony and joy of life of
the Infinite cannot penetrate into our life, as long as the
windows of discrimination in us are tightly shut. To the
extent the windows of my room are opened, to that extent
the room is flooded by the sunlight; to the extent a seeker
pursues his saadhanaa and brings about the above-
mentioned adjustments, to that extent the Grace of the Self
shall flood his within.
In the second line of the verse, the Lord warns against all
those who, in their utter ignorance, disobey this Law of
Life. Natural laws are irrevocable; they have neither eyes,
nor ears. They just continue in their own rhythm and that
man is happy who discovers the law and obeys it
implicitly.
BUT IF, FROM EGOISM, YOU WILL NOT HEAR ME,
YOU SHALL PERISH --- This is not a threat hurled down
upon mankind by a tyrannical power, to frighten the
human beings into obedience. This is not comparable with
the threat of hell held out by other religions. This is a mere
1307
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
statement of fact; even if Newton himself were to jump
from the third floor balcony of his house, the gravitational
force would indeed, act upon him also! There is an
inevitability in nature's laws. Man is free to choose
freedom or bondage. The path of freedom is described
above, and in this open and sincere statement, the Lord is
only showing great anxiety, not to mince matters, but to
be callously frank in His expressions.
Guidance to this true "way-of-life" always comes to us
from the depth of our nature, expressed in the language of
"the soft, small voice of the within." But man's ego and
ego-centric desires force him to disobey the ringing voice
of the Lord and such a one pursues a life of base vulgarity,
seeking sense-gratification and ultimately bringing
himself down to be punished by his own uncontrolled
emotions and unchastened ideas. Hence the warning:
"YOU SHALL PERISH."
TO WEAVE THE IDEA INTO THE VERY WARP AND
WOOF OF ARJUNA'S LIFE, THE LORD SAYS:
59. Filled with egoism, if you think, "I will not fight, " vain in
this, your resolve; (for) nature will compel you.
General statements of truth are too volatile to be retained
in one's understanding permanently. But the general
statements of life's principles, when woven into the
texture of one's own experiences, remain as one's own
1308
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
earned "knowledge," and they become permanent
WISDOM. Therefore, Krishna is trying to bring the
philosophical contents of his discourse into the very
substance of Arjuna's own immediate problem.
If, due to a sense of self-importance, the self-conceited
Arjuna were to think "I WILL NOT FIGHT," he shall be
thinking so in vain! The temperament of Arjuna must seek
its expression, and being a Kshatriya of "passionate"
nature, his Rajoguna will assert itself; "NATURE WILL
COMPEL YOU." One who has eaten salt must feel terribly
thirsty, ere long. The false arguments raised by Arjuna for
not fighting the battle are all compromises made by his
ego with the situation which he is compelled to face in the
crush of events around him.
Even if he were to follow his temporary attitude of
escapism and desist from fighting, it is a law of nature that
his mental temperament would assert itself at a later
period, when, alas! he may not have the field to express
himself in and exhaust his vasanas.
ALSO BECAUSE OF THE FOLLOWING REASON, "YOU
MUST FIGHT."
60. O son of Kunti, bound by your own KARMA (action) born
of your own nature, that which, through delusion you wish not
to do, even that you shall do, helplessly.
1309
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Continuing, the Lord, in effect, says: "I am asking you to
fight, not because I have no personal sympathies for you,
but because that is the only course left for you. You have
no other choice. Though you now insist that you "WILL
NOT FIGHT," it is merely an illusion. You will have to
fight, because, your nature will assert itself."
The actions, we do, are propelled by our own vaasanaas
and they shackle our personality. Arjuna is essentially of
the Rajoguna type, and therefore, he must fight. The
Pandava Prince cannot, all of a sudden, pose to have the
beauties of the Sattwic nature of heart and retire to a
solitary place to live a serene life of steady contemplation
and come to experience the consequent self-unfoldment.
Because of wrong thinking and miscalculations, Arjuna
feels that he does not like war, and therefore, he is not
ready to face it. But in spite of his determination, he will
be compelled to fight by his own nature, ordered by the
existing vasanas in him. This is the irrevocable law of life.
He who has no control over his mind becomes a victim of
circumstances. He gets thrown up and down by the whim
and fancy of things around him. But he who gains inner
mastery over the mind and stands firmly rooted and
unshaken by the circumstances is the one who will revel
(Rati) in the Pure Light (Bhaa) of wisdom; and the country
that recognises this culture has acquired its immortal
name 'Bhaarata.'
1310
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the previous two or three stanzas, we are told by
Krishna, "REMEMBER ME CONSTANTLY." What does
this mean? How should we remember? Does it mean
meditating upon the Lord? What should be our
relationship with Him? Are we to remember Him as a
historical event, or remember Him as intimately connected
with us as a 'Presence' expressing Itself at all times in and
through us?
ALL THESE QUESTIONS ARE APT TO RISE UP IN THE
MIND OF ANY SERIOUS STUDENT. THEY ARE
ANSWERED IN THE FOLLOWING:
61. The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna,
causing all beings, by His illusive power, to revolve, as if
mounted on a machine.
The advice given by the Lord is clear and beyond all
shades of doubt. "Remember the Lord," says the
Geetaacharaya, "as the One who organises, controls and
directs all things in the world and without Whose
command nothing ever happens. In His 'presence' alone
everything can happen --- therefore remember Him as
Ishwara." The steam functioning in the cylinder of the
engine is the "Lord" of the engine, and without it the
piston can never move. It is the steam which provides the
locomotion and renders the train dynamic.
1311
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Do not remember the Lord as merely a personified Power,
as Shiva in Kailasha, as Vishnu in Vaikuntha, as the Father in
Heaven etc., but recognise Him as one who dwells in the
heart of EVERY CREATURE. Just as the address of a
person is given, in order that the seeker of that person
may locate the individual in a busy town, so also in order
to seek, discover and identify with the Lord, His "Local
address" is being provided here by Bhagawan Krishna!
When we say that "THE LORD DWELLS IN THE HEART
OF ALL LIVING BEINGS," we do not mean the physical
heart. In philosophy the use of the word "heart" is more
figurative than literal.
RESIDING THUS IN THE HEART --- meaning, in the
mind of one who has cultivated the divine qualities such
as love, kindness, patience, cheer, affection, tenderness,
forgiveness, charity etc. The Lord lends His Power to all
living creatures to act on. He energizes everyone.
Everything revolves around Him --- like the unseen hand
that manipulates the dolls in the marionette-play. The
puppets have no existence, no vitality, no emotions of
their own; they are only the expressions of the will and
intention of the unseen hand behind them.
It is not the matter in us that moves or becomes conscious
of the world of transactions; or else the cucumber and the
pumpkin, the corn and the tomato of which our bodies are
made, will also have locomotion or Consciousness. When
the same vegetables are consumed as food and are
1312
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
digested and assimilated to become part of our physical
body, the matter, in contact with the Life-Principle in us
becomes vibrant and dynamic, capable of perceiving,
feeling and thinking. The Spark-of-Life presiding over the
body, the Pure Eternal Consciousness, is that which, as it
were, vitalises inert matter. Pure Consciousness in itself
does not act; but in Its Presence the matter envelopments
get vitalised, and then they SEEM to act.
The Atman, conditioned by the body, mind and intellect,
expresses dynamism and action, and creates what we
recognise as the manifested individuality. "The Supreme
functioning through the total bodies as the cause of all
action" is called Ishwara. Life functioning in each one of us
is the master, the controller, the director and the Lord of
our individual activities.
The essential Life in all of us is one and the same;
therefore, the Total Life functions through and manifests
as the entire universe, energising all existing equipments.
Thus expressing through all activities, is the Lord of the
Universe, Ishwara. With this understanding, if you read
the stanza again, you will comprehend the metaphor
employed herein.
IF THERE BE THUS A LORD WITHIN, MEANING A
POWER THAT RULES OVER AND GUIDES ALL MY
ACTIVITIES, WHAT ARE MY RESPONSIBILITIES AND
DUTIES TOWARDS HIM?
1313
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
62. Fly unto Him for refuge with all your being, O Bharata; by
His grace you shall obtain Supreme Peace (and) the Eternal
Abode.
Such an elaborate description has been given of the
Spiritual Presence which vitalises the world-of-matter
around man, only to bring about ultimately an
evolutionary self-development in the student. The very
core of this Geeta-philosophy is the theme that is indicated
in the opening stanza of the 'Ishaavasya Upanishad.' "The
Infinite Truth pervades everything in the world, and
therefore, renouncing all the multiplicity, enjoy the
Infinitude, and covet not anybody's wealth."
Recognition of the body through our abject identifications
with it, creates a false sense of individuality, and it is this
"ego" that suffers and sighs.
The one commandment that has been repeated all through
the Divine Song with great insistence is: "Renounce the
ego and act." The ego is the cause for all our sense of
imperfections and sorrows. To the extent we liquidate this
sense of separateness and individuality, to that extent we
climb into an experience of greater perfection and joy
within ourselves.
Krishna has been advising surrender of the "ego" unto the
Lord by developing a devoted attitude of dedication.
Arjuna, like a true intelligent sceptic, asks: "To which Lord
1314
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
should I renounce all my action? --- and dedicate all my
activities at which altar? Krishna has defined the Infinite
Lord in the previous verse, and now, here He advises
Arjuna to surrender his "ego" unto HIM. "FLY UNTO HIM
FOR REFUGE WITH ALL YOUR WILL."
Ours is an age of scepticism. The Arjuna of the Geeta is
rather like a typical representative of our own age in this
respect. A sceptic is one who questions the existing beliefs;
he wants to be intellectually convinced of the logical
grounds upon which the existing beliefs stand.
Earlier, Krishna has explained to Arjuna what is indicated
by the term Ishwara. Now the call of the Geeta to Arjuna is
to surrender himself unto the Lord. The Geeta requires all
of us to live and act with our hearts resting in self-
dedicated surrender to the Consciousness, the harmonious
oneness of Life that pulsates everywhere through all
equipments. In short, we are asked to identify ourselves
with the Spirit rather than the vehicles of Its expression.
He who has thus surrendered totally (Sarva-bhaavena)
gains an intellect fully awakened, and thereafter, external
circumstances cannot toss and crush his individuality.
The body and mind of such an individual who has learnt
ever to keep the refreshing memory of the present cannot
make any foolish demands. And when one brings such a
brilliant intellect into the affairs of life, all his problems
wither away and carpet his path to strive progressively
ahead.
1315
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
To the extent we identify ourselves with Him, to that
extent His light and power become ours, and they are
called "His Grace" (Prasaada). Ere long, as a result of this
"grace" accumulated within, through the integration of the
personality and constant surrender of the ego, the
individual shall obtain "THE SUPREME PEACE, THE
ETERNAL RESTING PLACE."
WITH ALL ONE'S BEING (Sarva-bhaavena) --- This
surrender unto the Lord should not be a temporary self-
deception. We must grow into a consciousness of the
Presence of the Divine in all the planes of our existence. To
illustrate such a total devotion, we have the examples of
Radha, Hanuman, Prahlada, and others. Without bringing
all the levels of our being, and all the facets of our
personality, into our love for Him, we cannot drown our
finite ego-sense into the joyous lap of the Infinite Lord.
Thus, a true devotee must re-orientate his being and must
surrender himself as a willing vehicle for His expression.
Then and then alone, all the delusions end, and the mortal
gains divine experience, and comes to live fully the State
of Immortality of the Godhood.
IN CONCLUSION KRISHNA ADDS:
63. Thus, the "Wisdom" which is a greater secret than all
secrets, has been declared to you by Me; having reflected upon it
fully, you now act as you choose.
1316
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This can be considered as THE CLOSING VERSE of the
Geeta discourses on the battle-field of Kurukshetra. The
word "thus" (Iti) is generally used in Sanskrit to indicate
what we mean nowadays, by the phrase "quotation
closes." The Lord has ended His discourses here.
A GREATER SECRET THAN ALL SECRETS (Guhyaat-
Guhyataram) --- A secret can be so called only as long as it
is not divulged. The moment we come to know of a thing
it is no longer a secret at all. The spiritual truth and the
right way-of-living as discussed in the Geeta are termed as
"THE SECRET OF ALL SECRETS" in the sense that it is
not easy for one to know the Geeta way of dynamic life
and the Geeta vision-of-Truth, unless one is initiated into
them. Even a subtle intellect, very efficient in knowing the
material world, both in its arrangement of things and their
mutual interaction, must necessarily fail to feel the
Presence of this Subtle, Eternal and Infinite Self.
Guhyam --- This is a term that has gone into much misuse
and abuse in India in our recent past. The term was
misconstrued to mean that the spiritual knowledge, which
is the core of our culture, is a great secret to be carefully
preserved and jealously guarded by the privileged few
against anybody else coming to learn it. This orthodox
view has no sanction in the scriptures if we read them
with the same large-heartedness of the Rishis who gave
them to us. No doubt, there are persons who have not the
intellectual vision, nor the mental steadiness, nor the
physical discipline to understand correctly this great
1317
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Truth in all its subtle implications, and therefore, this is
kept away from them lest they should come to harm
themselves by falsely living a misunderstood philosophy.
REFLECT OVER IT ALL --- Any amount of listening
cannot make one gain in "wisdom." The knowledge
gained through reading or listening must be assimilated
and brought within the warp and the woof of our
understanding; then alone can knowledge become
wisdom. Therefore, Arjuna is asked not to tamely accept
Krishna's Song of Life as truth, but he has been asked to
independently think over all that the Lord has declared.
To put the ideas between the mind and the intellect and to
chew them properly is "reflection." Each one will have to
get his own individual confirmation from his own bosom.
HEREAFTER ACT AS YOU PLEASE --- Krishna
ultimately leaves the decision to act, the will to live the
higher life, to Arjuna's own choice. Each one must reach
the Lord by his own free choice. There is no compulsion;
for, spontaneity is an invaluable requisite for all new
births. Having placed before him all the facts and figures
of life, principles and methods of living, Krishna rightly
invites Arjuna to make his own independent decision after
considering all these points. Spiritual teachers should
never compel. And in India there has never been any form
of indoctrination.
1318
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DEVOTION TO THE LORD IS THE SECRET OF
SUCCESS IN "KARMA YOGA." THIS IS EXPLAINED IN
THE FOLLOWING:
64. Hear again My supreme word, most secret of all; because
you are dearly beloved of Me, therefore, I will tell you what is
good (for you) .
When the Lord has concluded His entire discourse with
the words, "THE WISDOM HAS BEEN DECLARED BY
ME; NOW DO AS YOU PLEASE," Arjuna, who has been
all along devotedly and attentively listening to the
expounded philosophy, seems to register an expression of
confusion on his face. Arjuna wants to get some more
instructions. The Pandava Prince, perhaps, feels that he
has not fully assimilated the deep and intimate
philosophy of life as expounded by the Lord. Therefore,
Krishna continues, "AGAIN I WILL REPEAT THE
PROFOUNDEST 'WISDOM'; PLEASE, ARJUNA, LISTEN
ONCE AGAIN TO THIS SUPREME 'WISDOM'."
The motive force behind every teacher coming out into the
world to preach, to explain and to expound, is his
abundant love for mankind. Krishna repeats here the
salient factors of his philosophical goal and the means of
realising it, to Arjuna, "BECAUSE YOU ARE DEARLY
BELOVED OF ME," meaning "YOU ARE MY FAST
FRIEND." For this reason, Krishna tries to recapitulate his
scheme of right living and noble endeavour in brief.
1319
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna is by temperament a soldier; and a soldier's
intellect has no patience with a dialectical discourse. What
he can best appreciate is only a cut-and-dried order
shouted at him, and he has been trained by his vocation
always to follow it implicitly. Arjuna is expecting Krishna
to recast the whole philosophy into a precise, definite,
decisive commandment. Understanding this silent
demand of the soldier's heart, Krishna promises here that
He shall now declare the truth which is "the most secret of
all" (Sarva-guhya-tamam).
WHAT IS IT?
65. Fix your mind upon Me; be devoted to Me; sacrifice for Me;
bow down to Me; you shall come, surely then, to Me alone; truly
do I promise to you, (for) you are dear to Me.
Four conditions are laid down for a successful seeker; and
to those who have accomplished them all in themselves,
an assurance of realisation, "YOU SHALL REACH ME," is
given here. When a philosophy is summarised and
enumerated in a few points, it has a deceptive look of
utter simplicity, and a student is apt to take it lightly, or
ignore it IN TOTO. In order to avoid such a mistake, the
teacher invariably endorses his statement that it is indeed
all Truth: I PROMISE YOU TRULY."
To add a punch to this personal endorsement, Krishna
guarantees the motive behind His discourses: "YOU ARE
1320
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DEAR TO ME." Love is the correct motive force behind all
spiritual teachings. Unless a teacher has infinite love for
the taught there is no inspired joy in teaching; a
professional teacher is, at best, only a wage earner. He can
neither inspire the student nor, while teaching, come to
experience within himself the joyous ecstasy of
satisfaction and fulfilment, which are the true rewards of
teaching.
A substantial part of the philosophy and the "path"
declared herein have already been taught in an earlier
chapter (IX-34). And the same thing is repeated here with
the endorsement that what He is declaring is no pleasant
compromise but the total unadulterated truth.
WITH THE MIND FIXED ON ME --- Meaning "ever
remembering Me, ever devotedly identifying with Me"
through the process of dedicating all your activities unto
Me, in an attitude of reverence unto the All-pervading
Life, if you work in the service of the world, the promise is
that you will reach the Supreme Goal.
In all other religions the Goal is other than the Prophet;
only in the Geeta the Supreme Himself is advising the
seeker, and therefore He has to declare: "YOU WILL
REACH ME."
Looking up to Vaasudeva alone as your aim, means and
end, "you shall reach Me." Knowing that the Lord's
declarations are true, and being convinced that liberation
1321
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is a necessary result of devotion to the Lord, one should
look up to the Lord as the highest and the sole refuge.
The maladjusted "ego" in us has, by its own false concepts
and imaginations, spooled us all up into cocoons of
confusion and has tied us down with our own self-created
shackles. Now, it is up to us to snap these cords that bind
us and gain freedom from them all. The All-perfect
Supreme has been as though shackled by our mind and
intellect, and now the same mind and intellect must be
utilised to unwind the binding cords. If we lock ourselves
up in a room, it is left to us only to unlock its doors and
walk out into freedom. Vaasanaas are created by our ego-
centric activities (Sa-kaama-Karma) and by self-less work
(Nish-kaama-Karma) alone can these vaasanaas be ended.
Therefore, Krishna advises us: "Act on with mind fixed on
Me. Devotedly work for Me. Dedicate all your activities as
a sacrifice, as an offering unto Me."
An attitude of reverence to the Supreme is necessary in
order to re-incorporate into the texture of our own life, the
qualities of the Supreme. Like water, knowledge also
flows only from a higher to a lower level. Therefore, our
minds must be in an attitude of surrender to Him in utter
reverence and devotion.
When you work in the world with such an attitude,
Krishna says, "YOU SHALL REACH THE SUPREME."
1322
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ACCORDING TO SHANKARA, "HAVING TAUGHT, IN
CONCLUSION, THAT THE SUPREME SECRET OF
KARMA YOGA IS IN REGARDING THE LORD AS THE
SOLE REFUGE, KRISHNA NOW PROCEEDS TO SPEAK
OF THE INFINITE KNOWLEDGE, THE FRUIT OF
KARMA YOGA, AS TAUGHT IN THE ESSENTIAL
PORTIONS OF ALL THE UPANISHADS":
66. Abandoning all DHARMAS, (of the body, mind, and
intellect) , take refuge in Me alone; I will liberate thee from all
sins; grieve not.
This is the noblest of all the stanzas in the Divine Song and
this is yet the most controversial. Translators, reviewers,
critics and commentators have invested all their
originality in commenting upon this stanza, and various
philosophers, each maintaining his own point of view, has
ploughed the words to plant his ideas into the ample
bosom of this great verse of brilliant import. To Sri
Ramanuja, this is the final verse (Charama-Shloka) of the
whole Geeta.
Most often used, and yet in no two places having the same
shade of suggestion, the term, 'Dharma'has become the
very heart of the Hindu culture. This explains why the
religion of India was called by the people who lived in the
land and enjoyed its spiritual wealth as the 'Sanatana
Dharma.'
1323
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Dharma, as used in our scriptures is, to put it directly and
precisely, "THE LAW OF BEING." That because of which
a THING continues to be the THING itself, without which
the THING cannot continue to be that THING, is the
Dharma of the THING. Heat, because of which fire
maintains itself as fire, without which fire can no more be
fire, is the Dharma of fire. Heat is the Dharma of fire; cold
fire we have yet to come across! Sweetness is the Dharma
of sugar; sour sugar is a myth!
Every object in the world has two types of properties: (a)
the essential, and (b) the non-essential. A substance can
remain itself, intact, when its "non-essential" qualities are
absent, but it cannot remain ever for a split moment
without its "essential" property. The colour of the flame,
the length and width of the tongues of flame, are all the
"non-essential" properties of fire, but the essential
property of it is heat. This essential property of a
substance is called its Dharma.
Then what exactly is the Dharma of man? The colour of the
skin, the innumerable endless varieties of emotions and
thoughts --- the nature, the conditions and the capacities
of the body, mind and intellect --- are the "non-essential"
factors in the human personality, as against the Touch of
Life, the Divine Consciousness, expressed through them
all. Without the Atman man cannot exist; it is TRUTH
which is the basis of existence. Therefore, the "essential
Dharma" of man is the Divine Spark of Existence, the
Infinite Lord.
1324
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
With this understanding of the term Dharma, we shall
appreciate its difference from mere ethical and moral rules
of conduct, all duties in life, all duties towards relations,
friends, community, nation and the world, all our
obligations to our environment, all our affections,
reverence, charity, and sense of goodwill --- all that have
been considered as our Dharma in our books. In and
through such actions, physical, mental and intellectual, a
man will bring forth the expression of his true Dharma ---
his Divine Status as the All-pervading Self. To live truly as
the Atman, and to express Its Infinite Perfection through
all our actions and in all our contacts with the outer world
is to rediscover our Dharma.
There are, no doubt, a few other stanzas in the Geeta
wherein the Lord has almost directly commanded us to
live a certain way-of-life, and has promised that if we obey
His instructions, He will directly take the responsibility of
guiding us towards HIS OWN BEING. But nowhere has
the Lord so directly and openly expressed His divine
willingness to undertake the service of His devotee as in
this stanza.
He wants the meditator to accomplish three distinct
adjustments in his inner personality. They are: (1)
Renounce all Dharmas through meditation; (2) surrender
to My refuge alone; and while in the state of meditation,
(3) stop all worries. And as a reward Lord Krishna
promises: "I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS."
This is a promise given to all mankind. The Geeta is a
1325
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
universal scripture; it is the Bible of Man, the Koran of
Humanity, the dynamic scripture of the Hindus.
ABANDONING ALL DHARMA (Sarva-Dharman
Parityajya) --- As we have said above, Dharma is "the law
of being," and we have already noted that nothing can
continue its existence when once it is divorced from its
Dharma. And yet, Krishna says, "COME TO MY REFUGE,
AFTER RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS." Does it then
mean that our definition of Dharma is wrong? Or is there a
contradiction in this stanza? Let us see.
As a mortal, finite ego, the seeker is living, due to his
identification with them, the Dharmas of his body, mind
and intellect, and exists in life as a mere perceiver, feeler,
and thinker. The perceiver-feeler-thinker personality in us
is the "individuality" which expresses itself as the "ego."
These are not our 'essential' Dharmas. And since these are
the 'non-essentials,' "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS"
means "ENDING THE EGO."
"To renounce" therefore means "not to allow ourselves to
fall again and again into this state of identification with
the outer envelopments of matter around us." Extrovert
tendencies of the mind are to be renounced. "Develop
introspection diligently" is the deep suggestion in the
phrase "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS."
COME TO ME ALONE FOR SHELTER (Mam-ekam
Sharanam Vraja) --- Self-withdrawal from our extrovert
1326
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
nature will be impossible unless the mind is given a
positive method of developing its introvert attention. By
single-pointed, steady contemplation upon Me, the Self,
which is the One-without-a-second, we can successfully
accomplish our total withdrawal from the misinterpreting
equipments of the body, mind and intellect.
Philosophers in India were never satisfied with a negative
approach in their instructions; there are more DO's than
DONTS with them. This practical nature of our
philosophy, which is native to our traditions, is amply
illustrated in this stanza when Lord Krishna commands
His devotees to come to His shelter whereby they can
accomplish the renunciation of all their false
identifications.
BE NOT GRIEVED (Maa shuchah) --- When both the above
conditions are accomplished, the seeker reaches a state of
growing tranquillity in meditation. But it will all be a
waste if this subjective peace, created after so much
labour, were not to form a steady and firm platform for
his personality to spring forth from, into the realms of the
Divine Consciousness. The spring-board must stay under
our feet, supply the required propulsion for our inward
dive. But unfortunately, the very anxiety to reach the
Infinite weakens the platform. Like a dream-bridge, it
disappears at the withering touch of the anxieties in the
meditator. During meditation, when the mind has been
persuaded away from all its restless preoccupations with
the outer vehicles, and brought, again and again, to
1327
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
contemplate upon the Self, the Infinite, Lord Krishna
wants the seeker to renounce all his "ANXIETIES TO
REALISE." Even a desire to realise is a disturbing thought
that can obstruct the final achievement.
I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS --- That which
brings about agitations in the bosom and thereby causes
dissipation of the energies is called "sin." The actions
themselves can cause subtle exhaustions of the human
power, as no action can be undertaken without bringing
our mind and intellect into it. In short, the mind and
intellect will always have to come and control every
action. Actions thus leave their "foot prints," as it were,
upon the mental stuff, and these marks which channelise
the thought-flow and shape the psychological personality,
when our mind has gone through its experiences, are
called vasanas.
Good vasanas bring forth a steady stream of good thoughts
as efficiently as bad vasanas erupt bad thoughts. As long as
thoughts are flowing, the mind survives --- whether good
or bad. To erase all vasanas completely is to stop all
thoughts i. e. the total cessation of thought-flow viz.
"mind." Transcending the mind-intellect-equipment is to
reach the plane of Pure Consciousness, the Krishna-
Reality.
As a seeker renounces more and more of his
identifications with his outer envelopments through a
process of steady contemplation and meditation upon the
1328
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Lord of his heart, he grows in his vision. In the newly
awakened sensitive consciousness, he becomes more and
more poignantly aware of the number of vasanas he has to
exhaust. "BE NOT GRIEVED," assures the Lord, for, "I
SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS" --- the
disturbing, thought-gurgling, action-prompting, desire-
breeding, agitation-brewing vasanas, the "sins."
The stanza is important inasmuch as it is one of the most
powerfully worded verses in the Geeta wherein the Lord,
the Infinite, personally undertakes to do something
helpful for the seeker in case the spiritual hero in him is
ready to offer his ardent co-operation and put forth his
best efforts. All through the days of seeking, a Saadhaka
can assure himself steady progress in spirituality only
when he is able to keep within himself a salubrious mental
climate of warm optimism. To despair and to weep, to feel
dejected and disappointed, is to invite restlessness of the
mind, and naturally, therefore, spiritual unfoldment is
never in the offing. The stanza, in its deep imports and
wafting suggestions, is indeed a peroration in itself of the
entire philosophical poem.
HAVING CONCLUDED THE ENTIRE DOCTRINE OF
THE "GEETA-SHASTRA" IN THIS DISCOURSE, AND
HAVING ALSO BRIEFLY AND CONCLUSIVELY
RESTATED THE DOCTRINE IN ORDER TO IMPRESS IT
MORE FIRMLY, THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO
STATE THE RULE THAT SHOULD BE BORNE IN MIND
WHILE IMPARTING THIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS:
1329
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
67. This is never to be spoken by you to one who is devoid of
austerities or devotion, nor to one who does not render service,
nor to one who desires not to listen, nor to one who cavils at Me.
In almost all scriptural texts we find, in their closing
stanzas, a description of the type of students to whom this
knowledge can be imparted. Following faithfully this
great tradition, here also we have this enumeration of the
necessary qualifications for a true student of the Geeta.
These are not so many fortresses raised round the
treasure-house of the Geeta in order to protect some
interests and provide some people with a kind of
monopoly in trading upon the wealth of ideas in these
discourses. On the other hand, we shall find that these
qualifications are essential adjustments in the inner
personality of the student. And a bosom so tuned up is the
right vehicle that can daringly invest that knowledge in
living one's life and thus earn the joy-of-' wisdom.'
THOSE WHO DO NOT LIVE AN AUSTERE LIFE ---
Those who do not have any control over their body and
mind; who have dissipated their physical and mental
energies in the wrong direction and have thus become
impotent bodily, mentally and intellectually --- to them
"NEVER IS THIS TO BE SPOKEN BY YOU"; for, it will not
be beneficial to them. There is not a trace of prejudice in
this stanza. It is equivalent to saying "please do not sow
seeds upon rocks," for, the sower will never be able to
reap, as nothing can grow on rocks.
1330
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THOSE WHO HAVE NO DEVOTION --- That is, those
who do not have the capacity to identify themselves with
the ideal that they want to reach. If one cannot sympathise
with an ideal one can much less absorb or assimilate it. An
ideal, however well understood intellectually, cannot
yield its full benefit unless it is expressed in life. To hug on
to the ideal, in a clasp of love, is devotion.
THOSE WHO DO NOT RENDER SERVICE --- We have
seen earlier, almost in all chapters, Krishna again and
again insisting that selfless activity is not only a means for
the Saadhaka, but it is at once also the field where the
perfect masters discover their fulfilment. Seekers who are
not able to serve others, who are selfish, who have no
human qualities, who have never felt a sympathetic love
for others --- such persons are merely consumers and not
producers of joy for others, and they invariably fail to
understand or appreciate or come to live the joys of the
Krishna way-of-life.
THOSE WHO CAVIL AT ME --- Those who murmur
against Me. If we do not respect and revere our teacher we
can never learn from him. The first person singular used
in the Geeta is identical with the Self, the Goal, and
therefore, it means, "those who are not able to respect
philosophy." Forceful conversion may enhance the
numerical strength of a faith, but self-development and
inner unfoldment cannot come that way. Religion should
not be forced upon anyone. One who has mentally
rejected a philosophy can never, even when one has
1331
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
understood it, live up to it. Therefore, those who are
entertaining a secret disrespect for a philosophy should
NOT BE FORCED to study it.
Stanzas like this in a Shastra are meant as instructions for
the students on how to attune themselves properly so that
they can make a profitable study of the Shastra. None
should expect an immediate result from his study of the
Geeta. Personality readjustments cannot be made
overnight. There is no miracle promised in the Geeta.
Indirectly, the stanza also gives some sane instructions by
its suggestions. If a student feels that he cannot
satisfactorily understand the Geeta, he has only to sharpen
his inner nature further by the above subjective processes.
Just as we cleanse a mirror to remove the dimness of the
reflection, so too, by properly readjusting the mind-
intellect-equipment, its sensitivity to absorb the Geeta-
philosophy can be increased.
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO STATE WHAT
BENEFITS WILL ACCRUE TO HIM WHO HANDS
DOWN HIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS IN SOCIETY:
68. He who, with supreme devotion to Me, will teach this
supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtless come to Me.
The stanza under review and the following one are both
glorifications of a teacher who can give the correct
1332
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
interpretation of the Geeta and make the listener follow
the Krishna way-of-life. "Fight the evil down, whether it
be within or without" is the cardinal principle that Krishna
advocates to Prince Arjuna. In order to impart such a
culture, it is not enough that the teacher be a mere scholar,
but he must have the Krishna-ability. Hence the
glorification. The Lord's Song has a special appeal to those
who have the mysterious spiritual thirst to live a fuller
and more dynamic life. Hence it is said: "This deeply
profound philosophy" (Paramam Guhyam) must be
imparted to "My devotees" (Mad-bhakteshu). Devotion to
the Lord (Bhakti) means the capacity to identify with the
ideal, and therefore, the philosophy of the ideal way-of-
life can profitably be imparted only to those persons who
have a capacity to identify themselves with the ideal and
thereafter live up to it.
It is not sufficient that the student alone has this capacity
to identify himself with the higher ideal, but the teacher
also must have (Bhakti) "perfect attunement" with the
Supreme Krishna-Reality. Such an individual, who is
himself rooted in his attunement, and who tries to impart
this knowledge to others and thereby constantly occupies
himself in reflections upon the philosophical ideals of the
Geeta --- "shall certainly (Asamshayah) come to Me alone."
An educated man should, in his gratitude, feel much
indebted to the Muse-of-Wisdom. In fact, this
indebtedness is actually called, in our tradition, Rishi-
indebtedness (Rishi-Rinam), to absolve ourselves from
1333
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which, we are asked to study their works and preach their
ideas everyday.
Philosophy is the basis of every culture. The Hindu
culture can revive and assert its glory only when it is
nurtured and nourished by the philosophy of India which
is contained in the Upanishads. The fathers of our culture,
the great Rishis, knowing this secret, urged the students of
the Scriptures not to keep this knowledge to themselves,
but to impart it freely to others. In this way alone the
culture can be successfully brought into the dim-lit
chambers of people's lives.
If a student, who has understood even a wee bit of our
cultural tradition, does not convey it to others, it means
that there is no mobility of intelligence or fluidity of
inspiration in him. He who is thus capable of conveying
the truths of the Geeta to others is complimented here
with the promise of the highest reward: "HE SHALL
DOUBTLESS COME TO ME."
NOT ONLY THIS, BUT THE LORD EXPRESSES THAT
HE LOVES SUCH A TEACHER MUCH MORE THAN
ANYBODY ELSE:
69. Nor is there any among men who does dearer service to Me,
nor shall there be another on earth dearer to Me than he.
1334
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna again takes up, in this stanza, the glorification of
the teacher who teaches the Geeta-knowledge. Herein,
Krishna explains how such a man can reach Him easily, as
declared in the previous verse. The Geetaacharya
emphasises that such an individual is "DEAREST TO MY
HEART, AS I FIND NONE EQUAL TO HIM IN THE
WORLD." Not only is there none to compare with him
amongst the present generation, but there SHALL never
be (Bhavita-Na-Cha) anyone, even in future times, so dear
to Him, the Lord says, as such an individual who spends
his time in spreading the knowledge of what little he has
understood from the Geeta.
Earlier, in the Geeta, a great psychological truth has been
hinted at, which is often repeated throughout the entire
length of the Divine Song, and this cardinal secret is that
he who can bring his entire mind to the contemplation of
the Divine, to the total exclusion of all dissimilar thought-
currents, will come to experience the Infinite Divine. A
student of the Geeta who is spending his time in serious
studies and in deep reflection upon them, and in
preaching what he has understood, comes to revere the
knowledge and thus reach an identification with an inner
peace that is the essence of truth. Therefore, Krishna says:
"THERE CAN NEVER BE ANY OTHER MAN MORE
DEAR TO ME THAN SUCH A PREACHER; FOR, HE IS
DOING THE GREATEST SERVICE TO ME BY
EARNESTLY AND DEVOTEDLY TRYING TO CONVEY
THE IMMORTAL PRINCIPLES EXPOUNDED IN THE
GEETA."
1335
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is not necessary in this context, that we must first
ourselves become masters of the entire Geeta-Knowledge.
Whatever one has understood one must immediately,
with an anxious love, give out to those who are
completely ignorant. Also, one must sincerely and
honestly try to live the principles in one's own life ---
"SUCH A MAN IS DEAREST TO ME."
NOT ONLY THE PREACHER BUT EVEN THE SINCERE
STUDENT IS CONGRATULATED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:
70. And he who will study this sacred dialogue of ours, by him I
shall have been worshipped by the "sacrifice-of-wisdom, " such
is My conviction.
Having thus glorified all teachers of the Geeta who carry
the "Wisdom-of-the-sacred-discourse" to the masses, the
Geeta, here, is glorifying even the students who are
studying this Sacred text of the Lord's Song. The great
philosophy of life given out here as a conversation
between Krishna --- the Infinite, and Arjuna --- the finite,
has such a compelling charm about it, that even those who
read it superficially will also be slowly dragged into the
very sanctifying depths of it. Such an individual is, even
unconsciously, egged on to make a pilgrimage to the
greater possibilities within himself, and naturally, he
comes to evolve through what Krishna terms here as
"Jnaana Yajna."
1336
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In a Yajna, Lord Fire is invoked in the sacrificial trough
and into it are offered oblations by the devotees. From this
analogy, the term Jnaana Yajna has been originally coined
and used in the Geeta. Study of the Scriptures and regular
contemplation upon their deep significances kindle the
"Fire-of-Knowledge" in us and into this the intelligent
seeker offers, as his oblation, his own false values and
negative tendencies. This is the significance of the
metaphorical phrase Jnaana Yajna. Therefore, here the
Lord admits but a truth in the Spiritual science when He
declares that those who study the Geeta --- contemplate
upon its meaning, understand it thoroughly --- and those
who can, at the altars of their well-kindled understanding,
sacrifice their own ego-centric misconceptions about
themselves, and about the world around them, are
certainly the greatest devotees of the Infinite.
When a rusted key is heated in fire, the rust falls off and
the key regains its original brightness. So too, our
personality, when reacted with the knowledge of the
Geeta, is chastened, since our wrong tendencies,
unhealthy vasanas and false sense-of-ego which have risen
from false-knowledge (Ajnaana), all get burnt up in Right-
Knowledge (Jnaana).
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING THE GLORY OF THE
TEACHER AND THE BENEFITS OF THE STUDY SO
FAR, KRISHNA INDICATES IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA, THAT EVEN "LISTENING" TO THE GEETA
DISCOURSES IS BENEFICIAL:
1337
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
71. That man also, who hears this, full of faith and free from
malice, he too, liberated, shall attain to the happy worlds of those
righteous deeds.
A student of the Geeta cannot stand apart from his text
book, and merely learn to appreciate the theme of the
Lord's Song. An all-out, ardent wooing of the Geeta by the
student at all levels is necessary, if the study of the Geeta
is really to fulfil the student's spiritual unfoldment.
Consequently, Krishna indicates here two conditions,
fulfilling which alone can one profitably listen to the
Geeta discourses and hope to gather a large dividend of
joy and perfection.
ONE OF FAITH (Shraddhaavaan) --- The term Shraddhaa in
Sanskrit, though usually translated as "faith," actually
means much more than what it indicates in the English
language and in the Western tradition. Shraddha has been
defined as "that faculty in the human intellect which gives
it the capacity to dive deep into and discover the subtler
meaning of the scriptural declarations, and thus helps the
individual to absorb that understanding into the warp and
the woof of his own intellect."
Therefore, that faculty in the intellect, (1) to understand
the subtle import of the sacred words, (2) to absorb the
same, (3) to assimilate, and (4) to make the student live up
to those very same ideals, is Shraddhaa. Naturally,
listening to the Lord's discourses can be fruitful only to
1338
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
those who have developed this essential faculty in
themselves.
FREE FROM MALICE (Anasooyah) --- They alone who are
free from malice against the teachings of the Geeta can
undertake, with a healthy attitude of mind, a deeper and
detailed study of it. No doubt, Hinduism never asks any
student to read and study a philosophy with an implicit
and ready faith. But the human mind, as it is, will grow
dull and unresponsive when it has idle prejudices against
the very theme of its study.
The intellect can receive the ideals preached in the Geeta
only through the sense-organs, and these ideas must reach
the intellect, filtered through the mind. If the mind
contains any malice towards the very philosophy or the
philosopher, the arguments and the goal indicated therein
can never appeal to the student's intellect. No doubt, the
student should bring in his own constructive criticism of
an independent judgement upon what he studies, but he
must be reasonably available to listen patiently to what
the scripture has to say. In short, a student of religion
must learn to keep an open mind and not condemn the
philosophy before understanding what it has to say.
Such an individual who has attentively listened to the
Geeta, who has intellectually absorbed, and assimilated
the knowledge, "he too," says the Lord, "gets liberated"
from the present state of confusions and sorrows,
1339
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
entanglements and bondages in his personality, and
reaches a state of inner tranquillity and happiness.
JOY IS AN INSIDE JOB --- The kingdom of joy lies within
all of us. Heaven is not somewhere yonder; it is HERE
AND NOW. Happiness and sorrow are both within us. To
the extent we learn and live the principles of right living,
as enunciated in the Geeta, to that extent, we shall come to
gain a cultural eminence within ourselves and live an
ampler life of greater achievements.
It is the duty of a teacher to see that the student
understands the great Goal and the 'path' completely. If
the 'path' advised is found to be inadequate to bless the
student, it is the duty of the teacher to find out ways and
means of making the student discover his own balance.
HENCE IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA WE FIND
KRISHNA ENQUIRING WHETHER ARJUNA HAS
UNDERSTOOD WHAT HE HAS EXPOUNDED IN
THESE EIGHTEEN CHAPTERS:
72. Has this been heard, O son of Pritha, with single-pointed
mind? Has the distraction, caused by your 'ignorance, ' been
dispelled, O Dhananjaya?
Here, we find Lord Krishna, the teacher of the Geeta,
putting a leading question to his disciple, Arjuna, giving
him a chance to say how much he has benefited from the
1340
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
discourses. Of course, Krishna had no doubt about it; but
it is only like a doctor, who, confident of his own achieved
success, looks at the beaming face of the revived patient
and enquires "how are you feeling now?" This is only to
enjoy the beaming satisfaction that comes to play on the
face of the relieved patient.
HAVE YOU BEEN LISTENING WITH AN ATTENTIVE
MIND? --- The very question implies that if you have been
attentive you must have understood sufficiently the logic
in the things, beings and happenings around, and
therefore, your relationship with them also. The study of
Vedanta broadens our vision, and we start RE-
COGNISING, in a new light, the same OLD SCHEME-OF-
THINGS around us, and then its previous ugliness gets
lifted as though by magic.
HAS YOUR DISTRACTION OF THOUGHT, CAUSED BY
'IGNORANCE,' BEEN DISPELLED? --- The false values
that we entertain distort our vision of the world and our
judgement of its affairs. The delusion of mind was
expressed by Arjuna in the opening chapters of the Geeta
(I-36 to 46, and II-4 and 5).
Amputating a septic toe to save the body is no crime; on
the contrary it is a life-giving blessing; it is not a toe
destroyed, but it is a body and its life saved. The
CULTURAL CRISIS of those times had egged the
Kauravas on to rise up in arms against the beauty of the
spiritual culture of the land. Arjuna was called upon by
1341
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the era to champion the cause of the righteous. It was
indeed a false reading of the situation that perverted the
judgement of the Pandava Prince, as a consequence of
which he became utterly broken down, and came to
entertain a neurotic condition in himself. The fundamental
cause of all confusions was his own "NON-
APPREHENSION OF REALITY" called in Vedanta
philosophy as "ignorance" (Ajnaana). When this
"ignorance" is removed by the "APPREHENSION OF
REALITY," termed as "knowledge" (Jnaana), the entire by-
products of "ignorance" are all, in one sweep, eliminated.
Hence the logic of this enquiry from the teacher.
True "knowledge" expresses itself in one's own dexterity
in action and it should fulfil itself in the splendour of its
achievements in the service of society. In case Arjuna has
understood the philosophy of the Geeta he will no more
hesitate to meet the challenges as they reach him. This
seems to be the unsaid idea in the heart of the Lord.
ARJUNA CONFESSES THAT HIS CONFUSIONS HAVE
ENDED:
Arjuna said: 73. Destroyed is my delusion, as I have now gained
my memory (knowledge) through your grace, O Achyuta. I am
firm; my doubts are gone. I will do according to your word
(bidding) .
1342
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Somewhat like one who has suddenly awakened from an
unconscious state, Arjuna, with a regained self-
recognition, assuredly confesses that his confusions have
ended --- not because he has unquestioningly swallowed
the arguments in the discourses of the Geeta, but because,
as he himself says, "I have gained a RE-COGNITION of
my Real Nature. The hero in me has now become
awakened, and the neurotic condition that had
temporarily conquered my mind has totally ended."
Such a revival within and a rediscovery of our personality
are possible for all of us if only we truly understand the
significance of the Geeta philosophy. The Infinite nature of
Perfection is our own. It is not something that we have to
gain from somewhere by the intervention of some outer
agency. This Mighty Being within ourselves is now lying
veiled beneath our own ego-centric confusions and abject
fears. Even while we are confused and confounded, and
helplessly suffering the tragic sorrows of our ego, we are
IN REALITY, none other than our own Self. When the
dream ends, the confusions also end, and we awaken to
our Real Nature. So too, in life. This awakening of the
Divine in us is the ending of the beast within.
In this new-found equilibrium, born out of Wisdom, he
experiences an unshakable balance established upon firm
foundations. All vacillations of the mind, doubts and
despairs, dejections and hesitations, fears and weaknesses
have left him (gata sandehah).
1343
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
With such a revived personality, when Arjuna re-
evaluates the situation, he finds no difficulty at all in
discovering what exactly his duty is. He openly declares,
"I WILL DO ACCORDING TO YOUR WORD," for in the
Geeta, Lord Krishna stands for the Divine-Spark-of-
Existence manifested as "pure-intelligence."
All students --- who have thus fully understood the Geeta,
have a clear picture of the goal-of-life, who know what
'path' to follow and how to withdraw from the false by-
lanes of existence --- will surrender themselves, each to his
own integrated inner personality. To surrender ourselves
to our own "higher intellect" and to declare confidently
and with faith, "I SHALL DO THY BIDDING," is the
beginning and the end of all spiritual life.
SANJAYA GLORIFIES THE GEETAACHARYA AND HIS
DIVINE SONG, THE GEETA:
Sanjaya said: 74. Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue
between Vaasudeva and the high-souled Paartha, which causes
the hair to stand on end.
In the previous stanza, when one carefully understands
the full significance of the assertion made by the
rediscovered, and therefore, revived Arjuna, one cannot
avoid remembering a parallel declaration made by
another teacher of the world, when he revived from his
temporary confusion (Arjuna-sthiti). When he regained his
1344
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
spiritual balance, which he, as it were, lost temporarily
while carrying the cross through the taunting crowd, Jesus
also cried: THY WILL BE DONE." Here Arjuna, revived
by the Grace of Krishna, similarly cries, "I shall act
according to your word (Karishye Vachanam Tava)." In both
cases we find that the statements are almost identical.
Earlier, at the opening of the Geeta, the Pandava Prince
said to Govinda: "I SHALL NOT FIGHT," and became
despondent; it is the same Arjuna, now entirely revived
and fully rehabilitated, who declares: "I shall abide by Thy
will." The cure is complete and with this the Shastra also
ends.
THUS HAVE I HEARD THIS DIALOGUE BETWEEN
VAASUDEVA AND THE HIGH-SOULED ARJUNA --- In
the context of the Vyasa-literature, the conversation
between Vaasudeva, Lord Krishna, and the son of Prithaa,
Arjuna,
is but a silent mystic dialogue between the "higher" and
the "lower" in man, the "Spirit" and the "Matter."
Vaasudeva means the Lord (Deva) of the Vasus; the eight
Vasus (Ashta-vasu) together preside over Time. Therefore,
Vaasudeva, in its mystic symbolism, stands for the
Consciousness that illumines the "concept of Time"
projected by the intellect of man. In short, Vaasudeva is
the Atman, the Self. Paartha represents matter (earth)
which is capable of shedding itself, sheath by sheath to
emerge as the pure Eternal Spirit, the Supreme. This act of
1345
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
understanding himself as different from his matter
vestures is man's highest art, the Art of unveiling the
Infinite through the finite. The technique of this art is the
theme of the Geeta.
WONDERFUL (Adbhutam) --- This philosophy of the
Geeta, listened to so far by Sanjaya, is reviewed by him as
"miraculous," as "wonderful." Every philosophy, no doubt,
is a marvel of man's intellect and represents its subtle
visions and powers of comprehension. But the philosophy
of the Geeta was indeed a shade more marvellous and
wonderful to Sanjaya, because, it revived the BLASTED
personality of Arjuna into a DYNAMIC WHOLE. Because
of this practical demonstration of its powers to bless man,
the Geeta philosophy has acquired the marvellous lustre
of the rare.
It has proved, beyond all doubt, that every average
human being is endowed with potential power with
which he can easily conquer all the expressions of life in
him and command them to manifest exactly as he wants.
He is the Lord of his life, the master of the vehicles, and
not a victim of some other mightier power that has created
him, only to be endlessly teased by the whims and fancies
of his own body, mind and intellect. When this truth is
revealed, it is but human for Sanjaya, in ecstacy, to
exclaim: "Oh! what a marvellous revelation! What a
stupendous demonstration!! Adbhutam!!!"
1346
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HIGH-SOULED PAARTHA --- In the stanza Arjuna has
been glorified and not Lord Krishna, the Parthaasaarathi.
The Pandava Prince, Arjuna, had the courage and heroism
to come out of his mental confusions, when he gained the
right knowledge from his Master's teachings. Certain acts
of a child call forth our admiration, but the same acts
performed by a grown-up person, look perhaps ridiculous
and childish. To the omnipotent Lord, the declaration of
the whole Geeta itself is but a love-play. But, for the
confused Arjuna to understand the philosophy, and
heroically walk out of his confusions is indeed an
achievement, worthy of appreciation. Thus Krishna, the
All-perfect, is almost ignored, but Arjuna, the mortal, who
has understood the art of living as expounded in the
Geeta, and has actually revived himself by living it, is
heartily congratulated and glorified!
Sanjaya's sympathies were with the Pandavas; but as an
employed minister, he was eating the salt of
Dhritarashtra, and it was not Dharma for him to be
disloyal to his master. At the same time, in the context of
the politics of that time, Dhritarashtra was, perhaps, the
only one who, even then, could stop the war.
Diplomatically, Sanjaya tries his best, in these stanzas, to
bring into the blind man's heart the suggestion of a peace
treaty. He makes the blind king understand that Lord
Krishna has revived and re-awakened the hero in Arjuna.
The blind king is reminded of what the consequences
would be: the death and disaster to his hundred children,
the pangs of separation in his old age, the dishonour of it
1347
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
all --- all these are brought home to Dhritarashtra. But the
tottering king's "blindness" seems to be not only physical
but also mental and intellectual, for Sanjaya's beseeching
moral suggestions fall on the deaf ears of the blind elder.
SANJAYA OPENLY ACKNOWLEDGES HIS INDEBTED-
NESS TO SHRI VEDA-VYASA:
75. Through the grace of Vyasa I have heard, this supreme and
most secret YOGA , directly from Krishna, the Lord of YOGA,
Himself declaring it.
Before the great battle started, Vyasa had approached
Dhritarashtra to offer him the "power of vision" to witness
the war; however, the weak-hearted king had not the
courage to accept the offer. The king had then suggested
that if this power could be given to Sanjaya, the king
could, through the faithful minister, listen to a running
commentary of what was happening on the Kurukshetra
battle-field. It was thus from Vyasa that Sanjaya, sitting in
the carpeted chambers of the Kaurava palace, gained the
special faculty of witnessing all that happened and
listening to all that was said at the distant battle-field.
Grateful to Shri Veda-Vyasa for having given him this
wonderful chance of listening to this "Supreme and most
profound Yoga," Sanjaya is mentally prostrating to the
incomparable poet-sage, the author of the Mahabharata.
1348
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DIRECTLY FROM KRISHNA HIMSELF (Yogeshwarat
Krishnat) --- The suggestion is NOT that Sanjaya had never
heard the philosophy of the Upanishads ever before, and
that the novelty of the revelation had stunned him; but
that his joy is due to the fact that he got a chance to listen
to the Eternal Knowledge of the Upanishads directly from
the Lord-of-all-Yogas, Shri Krishna Himself (Saakshaat),
from His own sacred lips.
Here also we can see how Sanjaya is sincerely trying to
make the blind Dhritarashtra realise that it is not Krishna,
the son of Devaki, nor the cowherd boy, but it is the Lord
Himself the Yogeshwarah who has revived Arjuna, and
who is serving His devotee as his charioteer. The blind
king is reminded that his children, though they have
marshalled a large army, stand doomed to destruction,
since they have to face the Infinite Lord Himself in their
enemy ranks.
THE DEEP IMPRESSION CREATED BY THIS
IRRESISTIBLE PHILOSOPHY ON THE DEVOTED
HEART OF SANJAYA IS VIVIDLY PAINTED:
76. O King, remembering this wonderful and holy dialogue
between Keshava and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.
Herein we have a clear statement of Sanjaya's reactions to
his listening to the Lord's Song. He says, "THIS
DISCOURSE BETWEEN KRISHNA AND ARJUNA"-
1349
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
between God and man, between the Perfect and the
imperfect, between the "higher" and the "lower" --- is at
once "WONDERFUL AND HOLY."
The vision and impression created in his heart by the
philosophy that was heard are so deep and striking, that
Sanjaya admits how irresistibly the memory of those
words rises up again and again in his bosom, giving him
"the thrill of joy" (Harsham).
Indirectly, Vyasa is prescribing the method of study of the
Geeta. It being "a handbook of instruction" on the Art of
Living, it has TO BE READ AGAIN AND AGAIN,
REPEATEDLY REFLECTED UPON AND
CONTINUOUSLY REMEMBERED, until the inner man in
us is completely re-educated in the way-of-life that the
Geeta charts out
for man. The reward for such a painstaking study, and
consistency of application has also been clearly pointed
out.
One rejoices when one comes to recognise a definite
purpose in the otherwise purposeless pilgrimage of man,
from the womb to the tomb, called 'life.' The study of the
Geeta gives not only a purpose to our every-day existence
but also a positive message of hope and cheer to the
world. The Geeta picks us up from the by-lanes of life and
enthrones us as the sovereign power that rules, commands
and orders our own life within.
1350
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus the Geeta is an infinite fountain-head of inspiration
and joy. It provides our mind with a systematic scheme of
re-education whereby it can discover a secret power in
itself to tackle intelligently the chaotic happenings around
us which constitute our world of challenges. The Geeta-
educated man learns to RECOGNISE A RHYTHM, to SEE
A BEAUTY, and to HEAR A MELODY in the ordinary
day-to-day life --- a life which was till then but a mad
death-dance of appearances and disappearances of things
and beings.
SANJAYA CONFESSES THAT NOT ONLY DOES THE
PHILOSOPHY ENCHANT HIS MIND, BUT EVEN THE
MEMORY OF THE LORD'S WONDROUS FORM AS THE
TOTAL MANIFESTED UNIVERSE HAS A MAGIC OF
ITS OWN WHICH WARMS UP HIS HEART:
77. Remembering and again remembering, that most wonderful
Form of Hari, great is my wonder, O king; and I rejoice again
and again.
AS I OFTEN REMEMBER REPEATEDLY THAT MOST
WONDERFUL FORM OF HARI --- Lord Krishna, the
charioteer, gave the vision of His Cosmic-Form
(Vishwaroopa) in an earlier chapter; it is that Form that is
indicated by Sanjaya here. The Cosmic-Form of the Lord is
an impressive to the man-of-heart, as the philosophy of
the Geeta is unforgettable to the man-of-intelligence. The
concept of the Lord's "Total-Form" is staggering in the
1351
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Vedas, and no doubt, highly impressive in the Geeta. But it
need not necessarily be a mere poetic vision of the great
Vyasa; there are many others whose experiences are
almost parallel.
If the philosophy of the Geeta, as it reveals to us the
glorious purpose in life, inspires and thrills the thinking
aspect in man, the vision of the smiling Lord of
Vrindavana BEHIND EVERY NAME AND FORM,
BENEATH EVERY EXPERIENCE, UNDER EVERY
SITUATION, adds a life-giving joy and a maddening
ecstasy to the drunken heart
of love.
Given the freedom, I suppose, Sanjaya would have written
a full length Sanjaya-song on the Lord's Divine Song!
When the head is thrilled with the silence of under-
standing, and the heart is intoxicated with the embrace of
love, man gets transported into a sense of inspired
fulfilment.
TO EXPRESS THAT SATISFACTION, LANGUAGE IS A
FRAIL VEHICLE; THEREFORE, WITHOUT DILATING
MUCH UPON WHAT IS UPPERMOST IN HIS MIND,
SANJAYA SUMMARISES THEM ALL INTO A
DECLARATION OF HIS BURNING FAITH, IN THIS
CONCLUDING STANZA OF THE BHAGAWAD GEETA:
1352
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
78. Wherever is Krishna, the Lord of YOGA , wherever is
Paartha, the archer, there are prosperity, victory, happiness and
firm (steady or sound) policy; this is my conviction.
This is the closing stanza of SRIMAD BHAGAWAD
GEETA, which contains altogether seven hundred and
one verses. This concluding verse has not been sufficiently
thought over and commented upon by the majority of
commentators of the Geeta. The superficial word-meaning
of the verse, in fact, can only impress any intelligent
student, at its best, as rather drab and dry. After all
Sanjaya is expressing his private faith in and his personal
opinion about something which the readers of Geeta need
not necessarily accept as final. Sanjaya, in effect, says:
"Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and Arjuna,
ready with his bow, there prosperity (Sree), success
(Vijaya), expansion (Bhooti), and sound policy (Dhruva-
neeti) will be; this is my sure faith."
After all, a student of the Geeta is not interested in
Sanjaya's opinion, and it almost amounts to a foul and
secret indoctrination, if Sanjaya means, diplomatically, to
inject into us his own personal opinion. The Geeta, as a
"Universal Scripture" would have fallen from its own
intrinsic dignity as "the Bible of man" had this stanza no
Eternal Truth to suggest, which readily invokes a
universal appeal.
1353
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The perfect artist, Vyasa, could never have made such a
mistake; indeed, there is a deeper significance in which an
unquestionable truth has been expounded.
KRISHNA, THE LORD OF YOGA (Yogeshwarah Krishnah) -
-- All through the Geeta, Krishna represented the Self, the
Atman. This spiritual core is the Ground upon which the
entire play of happenings is staged. He can be invoked
within the bosom of each one of us through any one of the
Yoga-techniques expounded in the Geeta.
ARJUNA, READY WITH HIS BOW (Paartho-
Dhanurdharah) --- Paartha represents, in this text book, "the
confused, limited, ordinary mortal, with all his
innumerable weaknesses, agitations and fears." When he
has thrown down his "instrument" of effort and
achievement, his bow, and has reclined to impotent
idleness, no doubt, there is no hope for any success or
prosperity. But when he is "READY WITH HIS BOW,"
when he is no more idle but has a willing readiness to use
his faculties to brave the challenges of life, there, in that
man, we recognise a "PAARTHA READY WITH HIS
BOW."
Now putting these two pictures together --- Lord Krishna,
the Yogeshwarah, and Arjuna, the Dhanurdharah --- the
symbolism of a way-of-life gets completed, wherein,
reinforced with spiritual understanding, man gets ready
to exert and pour in his endevours, to tame life and master
prosperity. In such a case, there is no power that can stop
1354
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
him from success. In short, the creed of the Geeta is that
spirituality CAN be lived in life, and true spiritual
understanding is an asset to a man engaged in the battle-
of-life.
Today's confusions in society and man's helpless
insignificance against the flood of events --- inspite of all
his achievements in science and mastery over matter ---
are seen, because the Yogeshwarah in him is lying
neglected, uninvoked. A happy blending of the sacred and
the secular is the policy for man as advised in the Geeta.
In the vision of Sri Veda-Vyasa, he sees a world-order in
which man pursues a way-of-life, wherein the spiritual
and the material values are happily wedded to each other.
Mere material production can, no doubt, bring
immediately a spectacular flood of wealth into the pockets
of man, but not peace and joy into his heart. PROSPERITY
WITHOUT PEACE WITHIN IS A CALAMITY,
GRUESOME AND TERRIBLE!
The stanza at the same time refuses to accept the other
extreme; Yogeshwarah Krishna could have achieved
nothing on the battle-field of Kurukshetra without the
Pandava Prince, Arjuna, "ARMED AND READY TO
FIGHT." Mere spirituality without material exertion and
secular achievements will not make life dynamic. I have
been trying my best to bring out, as clearly as I can, this
running vein of thought throughout the Geeta, which
expounds the PHILOSOPHY OF HARMONY and
explains its plan for man's enduring happiness.
1355
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna, in the Geeta, stands for the MARRIAGE
BETWEEN THE SECULAR AND THE SACRED.
Naturally, it is the ardent faith of Sanjaya that when a
community or nation has its masses galvanized to endure,
to act, and to achieve (Paartha, the bow-man) and if that
generation is conscious of and has sufficiently invoked the
spiritual purity of head and heart in themselves (Krishna,
the Lord-of-Yoga), in that generation, prosperity, success,
expansion, and a sound and sane policy become the
natural order.
Even in the arrangement of these terms --- prosperity,
success, expansion and sound policy --- there is an under-
current of logic which is evident to all students of world
history. In the context of modern times and the political
experiences, we know that without an intelligent and
STEADY POLICY, no government can lead a nation to any
substantial achievement. With a sound policy,
EXPANSION of all the dormant faculties in the
community is brought out, and then only the spirit of co-
ordination and brotherhood in the fields of achievement
comes to play. In this healthy spirit of love and
cooperation, when a disciplined people work hard, and
when their efforts are intelligently channelised by the
sound policies of the government, SUCCESS cannot be far
away. Success thus earned, as a result of national
endeavour, disciplined and channelised by a firm,
intelligent policy, should necessarily yield true
PROSPERITY. A saner philosophy we cannot find even in
modern political thought!!
1356
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Enduring prosperity must be that which arises from
successful endeavour, that is the result of cooperative and
loving effort and this cannot yield any success unless it is
nurtured and nourished, guarded and protected, by an
intelligent and sound policy.
It now becomes quite clear that it is not only Sanjaya's
faith, but it is the ardent conviction of all men of self-
control and disciplined mind (Sanjayas), trained to think
independently.
There are some commentators of the Geeta, who draw our
attention to this concluding word in the Geeta, "my"
(mama), and to the opening word in the Geeta, "Dharma."
Between these two words the seven hundred stanzas are
hung together as a garland of immortal beauty, and so
these commentators summarize the meaning of the Geeta
as "MY Dharma" (Mama Dharma). The Geeta explains the
nature of man, MY Dharma, and the nature of Truth, MY
Dharma and how the true life starts when these two are in
harmony and come to play in one single individual. The
ideal nature of all true students of the Geeta, therefore,
should be a glorious synthesis of both the SPIRITUAL
KNOWLEDGE expressed in their equipoise and character,
and the DYNAMIC LOVE expressed through their service
to mankind and their readiness to sacrifice.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
1357
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eighteenth
discourse ends entitled:
THE YOGA OF LIBERATION THROUGH
RENUNCIATION
The closing chapter is entitled as Liberation through
Renunciation (Moksha-samnyasa-Yoga). This term is very
closely reminiscent of the Asparsa-Yoga of the Upanishads,
and the definition of Yoga as given by Krishna Himself in
an earlier chapter To renounce the false values of life in us
is at once to rediscover the Divine nature in each one of us
which is the essential heritage of man. To discard the beast
in us (Samnyasa), is the Liberation (Moksha) of the Divine
in us.
OM TAT SAT
MAMA SADGURU TAPOVANA CHARANAYOH
"At The Feet Of My Master Tapovanam."
Om Om Om Om Om
1358
