Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 3
Karma Yoga
The Yoga of action
Arjuna said: 1. If it be thought by you that 'knowledge' is
superior to 'action, ' O Janardana, why then, do you, O
Kashava, engage me in this terrible action?
Arjuna still believes that, to fight against his cousins,
teachers and grandfathers is a terrible (ghora) action. He
seems to have forgotten, or not to have understood at all,
Krishna's words in the last chapter. Kashava had therein
explained and clearly indicated that the Mahabharata-war
was not Arjuna's attempt to murder any of his cousins or
teachers. Arjuna cannot have any individual personality
185
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in any army. It was a war. In a war the two armies fight,
and it represents the clash of two ideologies. The
Pandavas were convinced of the moral purity, the
spiritual worth, and the divine glory of their standpoint in
the imminent test of strength. But unfortunately, Arjuna
could not sink his egoism, and see himself totally
identified with the army, championing the cause of the
good. To the degree he could not identify himself with the
cause, to that extent he nourished a self-centered egoistic
vanity, and, therefore, his moral puritanism in fighting the
war.
Arjuna means to say that Krishna's arguments were
supporting the 'Path-of-Renunciation,' they included an
advice to Arjuna to undertake the great and terrible 'Path-
of-Action.'
MOREOVER:
2. With this apparently perplexing speech you confuse, as it
were, my understanding; therefore, tell me that "one" way by
which, I, for certain, may attain the Highest.
Suffering from his own delusions as he was, Arjuna,
intellectually an average man, had not in himself that
amount of subtle philosophical acumen to discriminate
between the subtle arguments, and grasp for himself
whether the 'Path-of-Action' or the 'Way-of-Knowledge'
was the direct approach to the Infinite, the Eternal. His
question concludes, therefore, with a humble request:
186
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"Tell me that 'ONE' PATH by which, I, for certain, can
attain the Highest."
As a child of that age, there was no doubt, even in
Arjuna's mind, that life was not to be squandered away in
merely producing, acquiring, hoarding and spending
wealth. As a true child of Hinduism, he vaguely knew that
he had to fulfil a great cultural mission in the world, and
that material successes were only the means and not the
end, or the goal. Partha's doubt was only on how best he
could make use of the environments that presented
themselves to him so that he might carve out for himself a
greater cultural growth and a fuller spiritual unfoldment
in himself.
THE BLESSED LORD GIVES THE FOLLOWING REPLY
WHICH IS IN CONFORMITY WITH THE QUESTION:
The Blessed Lord said : 3. In this world there is a two-fold path,
as I said before, O sinless one; the 'Path-of-Knowledge' of the
SANKHYANS and the 'Path-of-Action' of the YOGINS.
To consider the 'Path-of-Action' (Karma Yoga) and the
'Path-of-Knowledge' (Jnana Yoga) as competitive is to
understand neither of them. They, being complementary,
are to be practised SERIALLY one after the other. Selfless
activity gives a chance to the mind to exhaust many of its
existing mental impressions. Thus purified, the mind
gains such a flight and ethereal poise that it can steadily
soar into the subtlest realms of meditation, and finally
187
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
come to gain the experience of the transcendental
Absolute.
Men belonging to foreign cultures find it very difficult to
understand Hinduism when they approach it with all
their native enthusiasm. They feel overwhelmed when
they read of such a variety of 'Paths' and seemingly
contradictory advices. But, to condemn Hinduism as
unscientific because of this, would be a mistake, as
colossal and as ludicrous as to say that medicine is no
science at all, since, for each patient, the same doctor
prescribes a different medicine, during a single afternoon!!
Religious men, men fit for spiritual discipline, fall under
two distinct categories: the active and the contemplative.
Temperamentally, these two classes fall so widely apart,
that to prescribe for both of them one and the same
technique for individual development, would be to
discourage one section and ignore its progress. The Geeta
is not merely a text-book of Hinduism but a Bible of
humanity. As such, in its universal application, it has to
show methods of self-development to suit the mental and
intellectual temperaments of both these categories.
Therefore, Krishna clearly explains here that the two-fold
path of Self-development was prescribed for the world-the
'Path-of-Knowledge' to the MEDITATIVE, and the 'Path-
of-Action' to the ACTIVE. It is added that this
classification and careful prescription for the two different
188
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
types of men has been in existence from the very
beginning of creation.
For the first time, Lord Krishna is giving us here in this
stanza, a glimpse of the identity of the man who is the
author of the Geeta. If it were given out by the son of
Devaki, a mere mortal who lived in that age, he would at
best, have given us only an intellectual theory built
entirely upon the observed data. Observed data always
have a knack of changing, and when they change, the final
conclusions also must necessarily change. We have now a
hundred different political and economic philosophies,
and numberless scientific theories that have all become
outmoded when the social living conditions, or the
economic structure, or the collected and observed data
have changed in their set up, or in their imperative
messages. If the Geeta was the conclusion of a mere
mortal Krishna's intellect, the values of life preached
therein would also have got outmoded and by now
become fossilised!
Here, He clearly says that, at the very beginning of
creation, these two 'Paths' were prescribed by 'Me';
thereby indicating that Krishna is talking here not as the
Blue Boy of Vrindavana --- not as the Beloved of the gopis -
-- not as the great diplomat of His age --- but as a Man-of-
Realisation, a Prophet, and a Seer, who lived in that
period of Indian history. It is neither as Arjuna's
charioteer, nor as a friend, nor as a well-wisher of the
Pandavas, that He is talking at this moment. Perfectly
189
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
identifying with the spiritual dignity in Himself,
experiencing His Absolute Nature, it is as the Eternal
substratum for the entire PLURALISTIC world, as the
Cause of all Creation, as the Might in all substances, that
He is talking now. Transcending all time and causation, in
a burning conviction of the lived Truth, He declares here:
"At the very beginning of creation, these two 'paths' were
given out by Me as the two possible methods by which the
ACTIVE and the CONTEMPLATIVE could seek and re-
discover the Eternal nature of their very Self."
THE 'PATH-OF-ACTION' IS A MEANS TO AN END,
NOT DIRECTLY, BUT ONLY AS A PREPARATION TO
THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE'; WHEREAS THE LATER,
WHICH IS ATTAINED BY MEANS OF THE 'PATH-OF-
ACTION,' LEADS TO THE GOAL DIRECTLY WITHOUT
EXTRANEOUS HELP. TO SHOW THIS THE LORD
SAYS:
4. Not by non-performance of actions does man reach
'actionlessness' ; nor by mere renunciation does he attain
'Perfection. '
Spiritually, as the Self, everyone of us is All-full and
Perfect. Due to our 'ignorance'of this spiritual experience,
we entertain in our intellect unending desires, each of
them being our own intellect's attempt to fulfil itself! It is
very well-known that we desire things that are not already
with us in full, or in a satisfying quantity. As the desires in
us, so are our thoughts; thoughts are the disturbances
190
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
created in our mental zone by our desires. At every
moment, the texture and quality of our thoughts are
directly conditioned and controlled by our desires.
Thoughts in an individual, expressed in the outer world-
of-objects, become his actions; actions are nothing other
than the actor's thoughts projected and expressed in the
world. Thus, in this chain-of-'ignorance,' constituted of
desires, thoughts, and actions, each one of us is caught
and bound.
If we observe them a little more closely, we find that these
are not so many different factors, but are, in fact, different
expressions of one and the same spiritual IGNORANCE.
This ignorance (Avidya), when it functions in the intellect,
expresses itself as DESIRES. When the desires, which are
nothing other than the 'ignorance,' function in the mental
zone, they express themselves as THOUGHTS. These
thoughts, when they express in the outer world, become
ACTIONS. Naturally, therefore, if the Supreme can be
defined as "the experience beyond ignorance," it must
necessarily be true that the Self is "the State of
"DESIRELESS-NESS" or "the Condition of
THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or "the Life of ACTIONLESS-
NESS."
By mere 'renunciation of action' (Samnyasa) no one attains
Perfection. Running away from life is not the way to reach
the highest goal of evolution. Arjuna's intention, you may
remember, was to run away from the war-front, and,
therefore, this misguided Hindu was to be re-educated in
191
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the right understanding of the immortal culture of the
Vedas. For this purpose was the Divine Song given out by
Krishna.
Through action, to a purification of the inner instrument,
applying which the seeker walks the 'Path-of-Knowledge'
to reach ultimately the spiritual destination of self-
development as indicated in this stanza. Hence it has been
often quoted by all great writers on Hinduism.
FOR WHAT REASON, THEN, DOES A PERSON NOT
ATTAIN PERFECTION THAT IS FREE FROM
ACTIVITIES BY MERE RENUNCIATION,
UNACCOMPANIED BY KNOWLEDGE? --- THE
REASON THUS ASKED FOR IS GIVEN AS FOLLOWS:
5. Verily, none can ever remain, even for a moment, without
performing action; for, everyone is made to act helplessly,
indeed, by the qualities born of PRAKRITI.
Man is ever agitated under the influence of the triple
tendencies of Unactivity (Sattwa), Activity (Rajas) and
Inactivity (Tamas) inherent in him. Even for a single
moment he cannot remain totally inactive. Total inactivity
is the character of utterly insentient matter. Even if we are
physically at rest, mentally and intellectually we are active
all the time, except during the state of deep-sleep. So long
as we are under the influence of these three mental
tendencies (gunas), we are helplessly prompted to labour
and to act.
192
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Therefore, not to act at all is to disobey the laws of nature
which shall, as we all know, bring about a cultural
deterioration in ourselves. If there is a creature who
remains inactive physically, he will get dissipated in his
thoughts. Therefore, the Geeta advises him to act
vigorously with a right attitude of mind, so that he may
avoid all internal waste of energy and learn to grow in
himself.
NOW, FOR HIM WHO KNOWS NOT THE SELF, IT IS
NOT RIGHT TO NEGLECT THE DUTY ENJOINED ON
HIM. SO THE LORD SAYS:
6. He who, restraining the organs-of-action, sits thinking in his
mind of the sense-objects, he, of deluded understanding, is called
a hypocrite.
To sit back physically retired is not the way to reach
anywhere, much less the final State of Perfection. If this
physical retirement is not efficiently accompanied by an
equal amount of mental and intellectual withdrawal from
the sensuous fields, the spiritual future of such a
misinformed seeker is surely very bleak and dreary.
The truth of this statement is very well supported by
modern text-books on psychology. To dissipate ourselves
with immoral or criminal thoughts is more harmful than
to physically indulge in them. The mind has a tendency to
repeat its own thoughts. When a single thought is
repeated off and on, it creates in the mind a deepening
193
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
impression, and afterwards all thoughts arising in the
mind irresistibly flow in that prepared channel. Once the
direction of the flow in the mind has become fixed, all
external activities of that individual become coloured by
this characteristic tendency. A mind that constantly
meditates on sensuous pleasures carves out for itself a
deep sensuous tendency and ere long we discover that the
individual is helplessly egged on to act in the external
world, as he had tragically planned for himself in his
mind.
To give physically a show of morality and ethics, while
mentally living a shameless life of low motives and foul
sentiments, is the occupation of a man who is not a seeker
of spiritual fulfilment, but, as is termed here, a self-
deluded hypocrite! Certainly we all know that, even if we
can physically discipline ourselves, it is not easy for an
average man to control the sensuous tendencies at his
mental level.
KRISHNA REALISES THAT AN ORDINARY MAN
WOULD NOT KNOW HOW TO SAVE HIMSELF FROM
THIS NATURAL INSTINCT AND, THEREFORE, HE
PRESCRIBES THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
7. But, whosoever, controlling the senses by the mind, O
Arjuna, engages his organs-of-action in KARMA YOGA,
without attachment, he excels.
194
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In these two innocent looking lines we have the entire
Science-of-Right-Action and the complete technique of
right living. The ECONOMICS OF THOUGHT is a science
unknown to the modern world while the thought
economists of yore carved out a Rishi-India and guided
the country to the golden era of its spiritual culture.
The mind is fed and sustained, nurtured and nourished by
the five organs-of-perception, with stimuli drawn from the
outer world of sense-objects. The mind in us, as it were,
flows out through the sense-organs, and when it comes in
contact with their respective objects, the sense-organs
perceive them. If the mind is not co-operating with the
sense-organs, perception is impossible, even though the
objects may be within the field of the organs. That is why
sometimes, when we are deeply attentive and fully
interested in reading a book, we do not hear even when
somebody calls us at our elbow. Examples can be
multiplied.
The prescription contained in this stanza asks a seeker to
control the sense-organs by the mind. This can be
effectively achieved only when the mind is given a
brighter and diviner field to roam about in. To control the
impetuosity of the mind with sheer will is like an attempt
to dam a river while it is in flood. It is destined to be a
futile attempt. Later on the Geeta will explain the
technique of this control.
195
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This control of the sense-organs by the mind is only the
negative aspect of the entire technique of right living.
Ordinarily, we spend a lot of our life-energies in the fields
of sense-objects. When the sense-organs are thus
controlled, we are conserving a large quantity of energy,
and unless this gathered energy is immediately given a
more profitable field of activity it is sure to break the
bounds and flood the inner world and, perhaps, sweep
away the entire personality equilibrium. The second line
of this stanza advises us what we should do with the
energies thus saved from their usual fields of dissipation.
The stanza says that these energies must be spent in
directing the seeker's organs-of-action to the appropriate
fields of activities. Even here, a very important precaution
has been lovingly advised by Krishna. The Karma Yogin
has been warned to act with perfect detachment.
When a camera is loaded with a piece of plain white
paper, however long we may keep the lenses open against
any well-lit object, no impression of the object concerned
can dirty the paper! On the other hand, if that very same
sheet of paper is sensitised, then, even a slight exposure
will leave the impressions of the object upon it. Similarly,
a mind plastered with attachment soon gathers on to itself
impressions (vasanas) during its contacts in the external
fields of activity. The Lord advises us to act without
attachment, so that, instead of gathering new impressions,
we may make use of our activities for the exhaustion of
the existing vasana-dirt in our mental equipment.
196
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The logical and scientific exposition of this theory is so
complete that, no student of the Geeta can discover in it
any loopholes for hesitation or doubt.
By withdrawing the organs-of-perception from their
unprofitable fields of activity, we save on the inner energy
which is spent through the organs-of-activity on a chosen
field of work; because of our inner attitude of non-
attachment during the activity, no new rubbish is
gathered by our mind, but, on the contrary, it gets itself
burnished by the removal of its existing mental dirt. The
very field of activity which ordinarily becomes a snare to
capture and imprison a soaring, soul, itself becomes the
exact art of self-liberation, when it is rightly employed by
faithfully following the 'way-of-life' advised in the Geeta.
WHEREFORE:
8. You perform (your) bounden duty; for, action is superior to
inaction. Even the maintenance of the body would not be
possible for you by inaction.
In our work-a-day world, we must understand this term
'bounden duty' (Niyatam Karma) in the text, to include all
"obligatory actions" of an individual in his home, in his
office, and in the society as a national being. Thus, not to
perform diligently all our duties in the home and in the
world outside would be inaction. We are warned that
even a healthy bodily existence is not possible if we were
to live in complete inertia and inactivity. Inactivity brings
197
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
about the destruction of the nation, of the society, and of
the home, and often the very individual himself becomes
victimised by his own idleness and suffers physical
debilities and intellectual deterioration.
IT IS ALSO WRONG TO SUPPOSE THAT ACTIONS
LEAD TO BONDAGE AND THAT THEY SHOULD NOT,
THEREFORE, BE PERFORMED. --- WHY?
9. The World is bound by action other than those performed 'for
the sake of sacrifice' ; do thou, therefore, O son of Kunti, perform
action of that sake (for YAJNA ) alone, free from all
attachments.
Every action does not bring about bondages upon the
doer. It is only unintelligent activities that thicken the
impressions in the mind, and thus successfully build a
thick and impenetrable wall between the ego-centre and
the unlimited Divine-Spark-of-Life in us. Every action
motivated by ego-centric desires thickens the veil and
permits not even a single ray of the essential Divinity to
peep through it, to illumine the life in us. According to the
traditional translation, all activities other than the Yajna-
activities will bring about vasana-bondages, and the
individual's ultimate development and growth will be
arrested.
Yajna here means only "any self-sacrificing work,
undertaken in a spirit of self-dedication, for the blessing of
all." Such an action cannot be self-degrading and,
198
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
therefore, it is self-liberating. The following stanzas also
will become more and more clear, and universally
appropriate in their meaning, only when we understand
Yajna as "any social, communal, national, or personal
activity into which the individual is ready to pour himself
forth entirely in a spirit of service and dedication."
Only when people come forward to act in a spirit of co-
operation and self-dedication, can the community get
itself freed from its shackles of poverty and sorrow. This is
a fact endorsed by history. And such activities can be
undertaken in a spirit of Divine loyalty, only when the
worker has no attachment. Arjuna's defect was that he got
too attached to the individuals in the opposing forces, and
he developed, consequently, wrong relationships with
them. Therefore, he came to feel that he must run away
from the field of work that had presented itself before
him.
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION
SHOULD BE DONE BY HIM, WHO IS QUALIFIED FOR
IT:
10. The PRAJAPATI (the Creator) , having in the beginning (of
creation) created mankind, together with sacrifices, said, "by
this shall you prosper; let this be the milch-cow of your desire ---
"KAMADHUK" (the mythological cow which yields all desired
objects) .
199
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Even when the Creator, the Total-mind, puts up the show
of the Universe of the Five Elements and brings forth the
living organisms along with man, on this stage of life to
work, to strive and to achieve, he creates also Yajna, "the
spirit of self-dedicated activities." The Yajna-spirit is seen
everywhere: the Sun shines, the Moon appears, the Sea
throbs, the Earth bears --- all in a spirit of sacrifice and
self-dedicated motherly love with never even a trace of
attachment or any kind of self-arrogating motives.
The whole world of cosmic powers, and nature's
phenomena function instinctively in the service of all.
Even before life could appear on the face of the earth, the
elemental forces had prepared the field with their constant
activities performed in the sacred spirit-of-dedication.
Even when life developed and multiplied, at all levels, we
can easily recognise different degrees of Yajna-activities,
which keep up the harmonious growth of existence.
The above idea, when poetically put, becomes this
pregnant stanza in the Geeta. The Creator created the
world along with the "spirit-of-service" and the "capacity-
for-sacrifice." As it were, the Creator declared, "by this
spirit of self-sacrifice shall you multiply; this shall be the
milch-cow of your desires." Kamadhenu is a mythological
cow, supposed to have belonged to Sage Vasishta, from
which all our desires could be milked out. The term,
therefore, means only that no achievement is impossible
for man, if he knows how to act in the discipline of co-
operation, and if he is ready to bring forth into his
200
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
activities the required amount of non-attachment and
spirit of sacrifice.
HOW CAN THIS BE ACHIEVED BY SACRIFICE?
11. With this, you do nourish the gods and may those DEVAS
nourish you; thus nourishing one another, you shall, attain the
Highest Good.
The whole Vedic concept of Devas is that of one Universal
Power, ever active in the world of phenomena, receiving
appropriate names because of Its multiple functions. All
Vedic gods are but functional names of the one Supreme
Creative Power manifesting in myriad forms.
In understanding the stanza in its more universal
application, we have to interpret the term Deva as the very
"presiding deity" in any field of activity, who blesses the
worker in that field with his profit. The deity that blesses
the worker in a field of activity can be nothing other than
"THE PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL" in that given field.
When we apply in any situation our true and sincere
work, the efforts and sacrifices so made, as it were, invoke
the 'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL' in that situation, which
comes to manifest and bless the worker. This becomes
obvious when we try to understand what we, in the
modern world mean, when we say Mother India. In thus
symbolising the might of a nation we mean the
201
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL" of that country in all her
spheres of activities.
It is obvious that the productivity that is dormant in any
situation can be invoked only by man's sincere efforts.
This potential which generally lies dormant everywhere is
the Deva to be cherished by the worker through the Yajna
activities, and certainly the Deva will manifest itself to
cherish, or to bless the worker. "Thus cherishing one
another, man shall gain the Highest Good," is the Divine
intention in the mind of the creator, says Krishna in this
stanza.
The Law-of-Seva is faithfully followed by every sentient
and insentient member of the cosmos instinctively. Man
alone is given the freedom to act as he likes and to the
extent he disobeys this Universal Law-of-Sacrifice, Yajna,
to that extent he comes to suffer, because he, with his
arrogant and egoistic actions, brings discord in the
harmony of the existence around him.
MOREOVER:
12 "The DEVAS , nourished by the sacrifice, will give you the
desired objects. " Indeed he who enjoys objects, given by the
DEVAS , without offering (in return) to them, is verily a thief.
Here, Krishna repeats the unalterable ritualistic law "that
the Devas, cherished by Yajna, will provide us with the
202
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
desired objects." The truth of this statement becomes self-
evident and clear when we re-read this statement
substituting our meaning for the terms Deva and Yajna.
The "productive potential" (Deva), when cherished
through "self-dedicated work performed in a spirit of
sacrifice" (Yajna), will provide the worker with the desired
objects. This is the law-of-life.
And when we thus earn a profit due to our sacrifices, we
have every right to enjoy that profit SHARING IT
AMONG OURSELVES. But no living creature should
enjoy benefits of others' actions without contributing his
own share to the total effort. In the capitalistic system of
life we notice the wrong tendency of self-aggrandisement
of profits produced out of the collective efforts of millions
of workers. This ultimately creates sad maladjustments in
all spheres of activity, and national and international
peace is threatened when we thus upset the law of
harmony in life. When this idea, familiar in modern
finance, "that a member of a society who consumes
without producing is a liability to the nation," is re-read in
the language of the Vedas, it is spelt as the second line of
this stanza.
HE WHO ENJOYS OBJECTS, GIVEN BY THE Devas, the
"productive potential tapped," without offering his own
Yajna-efforts into it, is termed here by Krishna as a 'social
thief.' Considering the moral and ethical idealism
recognised and respected at the time of the Geeta, the
term 'thief' used here is indeed a powerful word, fully
203
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
implying the low depravity and disrespectful nature of
such a social criminal who eats without producing.
ON THE OTHER HAND:
13. The righteous, who eat the "remnants of the sacrifices" are
freed from all sins; but those sinful ones, who cook food (only)
for their own sake, verily eat but sin.
As a contrast to such social criminals, feeding themselves
upon the social wealth, in producing which they have not
brought in any self-effort, in this stanza, we have the
good, who receive for themselves their "share," after
sweating hard in sincere Yajna-activities. Such people, as
explained here "go beyond all sins."
Sins of the past are the causes for the present pains, and
the present sins would be the causes for the future
sorrows. Thus, all causes for the sorrows in social life
would be, no doubt, removed, if the good and socially-
conscious members of a community were to feel satisfied
in enjoying the "remnants" of their co-operative work
performed in the true Yajna-spirit.
As a contrast to these, it has been declared that those who
cook food for themselves alone, "eat but sin." It seems that
Krishna is perfectly against private property, not in the
sense in which a communist would understand it. Krishna
seems to be against the principle of arrogation of wealth,
204
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and of hoarding the same, motivated by lust of lucre,
meant mainly for selfish enjoyment, utterly regardless of
the privations and poverty of the unfortunate folks
around in the community. It is said that such hoarders of
wealth "eat but sin."
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION
SHOULD BE PERFORMED BY HIM WHO IS QUALIFIED
FOR ACTION. FOR, IT IS ACTION THAT SETS THAT
WHEEL OF THE UNIVERSE MOVING. HOW? THE
ANSWER FOLLOWS:
14. From food come forth beings; from rain food is produced;
from sacrifice arises rain, and sacrifice is born of action.
15. Know you that action comes from BRAHMAJI (the creator)
and BRAHMAJI come from the Imperishable. Therefore, the all-
pervading BRAHMAN (God-principle) ever rests in sacrifice .
The cosmic-wheel-of-cooperative-action is being narrated
here in the familiar language of the Vedas. The living
creatures are born out of food, and they are nourished by
food. The mineral-wealth of the world becomes
assimilable food --- both as vegetarian and non-vegetarian
--- only by the action of rain upon it. But for rains the
vegetables will not grow, and the lack of proper grazing-
grounds is a danger to cattle-wealth. "Rains come as a
result of Yajna, and Yajnas are performed through human
action."
205
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This stanza may read strangely to those who are not ready
to bring the full shaft of their intelligence for the purpose
of understanding it. It is evident to any modern educated
man that living creatures are born out of matter. Matter is
rendered consumable and digestible, nutritive and
assimilable, only by the action of rains upon it. But the
difficulty in understanding the stanza is when we come to
the next assertion that "the rains come as a result of
Yajnas."
But in Krishna's words here, we are not warranted in
accepting that he is advising Arjuna to follow ritualism. In
this stanza, as also elsewhere all along the Geeta, the
familiar terms of the Vedic period has been charged with
new meanings and significances. "Rain" is the essential
condition for the conversion of the mineral-raw-material
into enjoyable and nutritive food. Similarly, in all fields of
activity there is "an enjoyable profit" which can be
gathered only when the fields come under "conditions
favourable" for them to produce those profits. "Self-
dedicated activities" (Yajna), when performed in any given
field of endeavour, will be creating therein "conditions
necessary for the field to smile forth" (rain) in a luxurious
"crop of profit" (Annam), enjoyable by the society.
For example, the wasteful waters of a river flowing idly
can be dammed and made use of, if the waters are
intelligently employed in irrigating the fertile lands now
lying fallow on its banks. Through sacrifice and work
alone can the dam be built and when it is built, it provides
206
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"conditions helpful" for bringing the lands on either side
under the plough. Again, for making use of irrigated land,
man has yet to strive: ploughing, sowing, weeding,
waiting, gathering --- before he can come to enjoy the
profit of his activities, the food.
We are shown how this Wheel-of-Action (stanza-15), is
connected with and includes the Supreme. The principle
of right action, nay, even the power to act, has come out of
the Creator himself and the Creator is none other than the
Imperishable Supreme. Action IS in the new-born live
baby; action is a gift from the Creator! Therefore, the All-
pervading Supreme is ever centred in all undertakings
pursued, by one or many people, in an honest spirit of
Self-dedication, for the good of all.
HE, WHO LIVES IN UNISON WITH THIS WHEEL-OF-
ACTION, IS CONTRIBUTING TO THE HARMONY OF
LIFE. WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM WHO DISOBEYS?
16. He who does not follow here the wheel thus set revolving, is
of a sinful life, rejoicing in the senses. He lives in vain, O Son of
Pritha.
Every member in the entire kingdom of the minerals, the
vegetables and the dumb-creatures, instinctively follows
this principle of Yajna and contributes thereby to the
smooth running of the Universal-Wheel-of-Action.
Among living creatures, man alone has been allowed the
207
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FREEDOM OF ACTION to contribute to the harmony, or
to bring about discord in the smooth running of this
cosmic mechanism. So long as the majority of a generation
manage to live abiding by the Law-of-Harmony they shall
grow from strength to strength, opening up fields of
happiness for themselves. Such periods are called the
golden eras of their social and cultural life.
But, this faithful obedience is not always possible, for all
of them, at all times. At certain periods of history, man, as
a social being, comes to revolt against this Eternal Law,
and then, life starts slipping away from its peaceful
domain of constructive growth, and shatters itself in
tearful ruin. Such ages are the dark ages of despair and
restlessness, war and pestilence, flood and famine.
The question naturally arises as to why the bright day of
the world slowly sets itself to bring in the dark night of
chaos. The explanation is given here in the Geeta.
A community is made up of its individuals. However
much we may glorify the achievements of the community
as such, we cannot totally ignore the contributions made
by the units constituting the community --- the
individuals. If the individuals are perfect, the community
works smoothly. But, if the units are wrongly composed,
then the entire healthy growth and strength of structure in
the total collapses. The individuals' negative existence
starts with their pre-occupation with their senses. In their
limited recognition that they are themselves nothing more
208
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
than their body, they become pre-occupied with its
nourishment and fattening. As a body, they cannot
perceive the Higher 'ways of life'; nor can they entertain
any goal other than seeking satisfactions for their mere
animal passions.
In such an era, nobody would come forward to work in
the redeeming noble spirit of Yajna, without which, no
"favourable circumstances" (rain), could be created for the
"productive potentials" (Devas) to manifest themselves as
nourishing joy. Seekers of sense (Indriya-ramah), they
compete among themselves, each seeking with lustful
greed, his own selfish happiness, and they, often
unconsciously, bring about a discordant rhythm in the
Wheel-of-Action. Such people are considered by the Geeta
as "living in sin," and the Divine Song asserts, "they live in
vain."
NOW THE LORD HIMSELF SUPPOSES ARJUNA TO
ASK THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: "IS THE WHEEL-
OF-ACTION, THUS SET IN MOTION, TO BE
FOLLOWED BY ALL, OR BY HIM ONLY WHO HAS
NOT YET ATTAINED FIRM FAITH IN THE PATH OF
KNOWLEDGE?"
17. But the man who rejoices only in the Self, who is satisfied
with the Self, who is content in the Self alone, for Him verily
there is nothing (more) to be done.
209
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Wheel-of-Action explained above is generally
applicable to the majority of seekers, and actions in the
world undertaken in a spirit of Yajna integrate their
personality and make them more and more prepared for
the highest vocation in life, meditation. Through selfless
work, an individual gains an increasing amount of inner
poise and when such a single-pointed mind is brought to
function at the meditation seat, the meditator gains the
experience of transcending his limited ego. To such a
perfected one, work is not a training to purify himself but
it is a fulfilment of his own God-realisation.
It is a fact that we are egged on to activity seeking and
demanding a better SATISFACTION and a complete
CONTENTMENT. Satisfaction and contentment are the
two wheels of the life-chariot. In order to gain a better
satisfaction and to reach nearer the point of contentment
we are goaded to act in the outer world, to earn and to
save, to hoard and to spend. But the man of perfection,
who on transcending his limited identification with his
matter-envelopments, when he gets himself ushered into
the All-perfect Realm of the Spirit, he comes to feel so
satisfied with the State of Self-hood which he thereby
attains, that he experiences a complete sense of
contentment in the very Divine Nature, and that provides
eternal satisfaction for him.
Where satisfaction and contentment have arrived, there, in
that bosom, desires cannot arise at all; and where the
desires are not, there cannot be any action. Thus, the
210
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
effects (Karya) are not possible in him; the effects of the
spiritual 'ignorance'and 'desires,' 'thoughts' and 'actions.'
Naturally, in such an individual there cannot be any
"obligatory duty"; all work has been at once fulfilled in
him. Thereafter, he is free to act, or not to act, to serve, or
not to serve, and lives as a God-man upon the earth.
MOREOVER:
18. For him there is here no interest whatever in what is done,
or what is not done; nor does he depend upon any being for any
object.
An ordinary man is whipped up to action either because
of his anxiety to gain a profit or because of his fear that by
not doing work he will be incurring a loss. But an
individual, who has the subjective experience of the
spiritual stature in him, who has, therefore, discovered an
Eternal satisfaction in his own Self, and who has reached
perfect contentment therein, will have no more action to
perform, for he has nothing more to gain through activity,
nor can he have any fear of losing anything in the world
due to non-performance of any action. Such an individual,
rooted in the experience of the Self, and depending upon
nothing --- neither any being nor any object --- for his joy
and bliss, has discovered the "Subject"; the objects-of-the-
world are essentially nothing other than the "Subject,"
being tossed on the waves of agitations in the mind.
211
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'YOU HAVE NOT ATTAINED TO THE RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE, ALL-PERVADING LIKE THE FLOOD
WATERS, (II-46) WHEREFORE":
19. Therefore, always perform actions which should be done,
without attachment; for, by performing action without
attachment, man attains the Supreme.
We have already noticed that Krishna pre-supposes no
knowledge in his friend, nor does he thrust upon Arjuna
bare statements that are to be blindly believed and silently
swallowed by him. Proselytisation is not the technique of
Vedanta. Hindus are strangers to it. Every strong statement
of fact is preceded by a line of logical thoughts explained
at length. Till now Krishna was explaining the 'wheel-of-
action,' and after exhausting the exposition of this entire
theory, he, in this stanza, is crystallising his conclusions
encouraging Arjuna to act.
Therefore, always perform actions which are obligatory in
your present social status, in your domestic situation, as a
member of your community and the nation. Even here,
Krishna is repeating his warning to Arjuna that he must
be careful in all his activities, to keep his mind away from
all dangerous "attachments." The Lord has already
explained how "attachments" directly help to form
tendencies in the mind and deepen fresh vasana-
impressions within.
212
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO YOU
SHOULD PERFORM ACTION":
20. Janaka and others attained Perfection verily by action only;
even with a view to protecting the masses you should perform
action.
Thus, the wise Kings of yore, such as Janaka and
Ashwapati, had tried to attain Perfection, (Samsiddhi), by
the 'Path-of-Action.' They were men of right
understanding as they tried to liberate themselves
through right actions performed in a spirit of detachment
and self-dedication. They had set an example to the world
by their achievement through an immaculate life of
service.
Krishna means that Arjuna too, a prince by birth, and one
who has taken upon himself the entire responsibility of
mobilising and fighting the war, should respect his
Prarabdha and act diligently without running away from
the battle-field as he had earlier intended to do. This is the
only method by which he can gain a complete vasana-
exhaustion in himself. Born as a king, he had a greater
responsibility towards the community, than any other
member. Therefore, it was his duty that he should keep to
his post and work diligently.
A creeper will never grow in a desert. It is nature's law
that every living creature finds itself in the most
213
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
conducive outerworld conditions. Thus viewed, because
of the very fact that he had manifested himself as a son of
his father in the family of kings, nature had judged that
the most conducive circumstance in life for Arjuna was
the life of a prince, daring dangers, fighting enemies, and
generally ordering peaceful and progressive growth for
the society.
"WHO SHOULD SECURE THE WELFARE OF THE
WORLD? AND HOW?" THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
21. Whatever a great man does, that other men also do (imitate)
; whatever he sets up as the standard, that the world (people)
follows.
Man is essentially an imitating animal. This is a
psychological truth. The moral rejuvenation of a society in
any period of history can take place only because of the
example set up by the leaders of that nation. Students can
be disciplined only when teachers are well-behaved; the
minor officials cannot be kind and honest when the rulers
of the country are corrupt tyrants. Children's behaviour
depends entirely upon, and is ever controlled by, the
standard of purity and culture of their parents.
With this Krishna raises his next argument on why Arjuna
should act in the world. Unless he diligently acts, the
chances are that the entire community will follow the low
standard of retreat from action set up by him and thus
214
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
they will ultimately invite a general decadence of culture
in life.
Now, to emphasise the point and to make a lasting
impression upon Arjuna of the teaching so far given (III-4
to 21), Lord Krishna indicates himself as an example. The
Lord, though already a liberated soul (Mukta), is acting
diligently, without attachment, as a model, for his
generation to rise up above the slothfulness of the age into
vigorous activity.
The very creed of Krishna is "active resistance to evil." His
non-violence is not the instinctive incapacity of the day-
dreaming coward who cannot stand up against injustice
and fight for the accepted principles of national culture.
There could not have been any doubt now left in the mind
of Arjuna regarding the efficacy of the 'Path-of-Action'
advised to him.
"IF YOU HAVE A DOUBT AS REGARDS THE
NECESSITY FOR WORKING FOR THE PROTECTION
OF THE MASSES, WHY DO YOU NOT OBSERVE ME?
WHY DO YOU NOT FOLLOW MY EXAMPLE, AND TRY
TO PREVENT THE MASSES FROM GOING ASTRAY,
SETTING UP FOR THEM AN EXAMPLE IN
YOURSELF?"
215
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
22 There is nothing in the three worlds, O Partha, that has to be
done by Me, nor is there anything unattained that should be
attained by Me; yet, I engage Myself in action.
Being a Perfect-Man, a true Yogi, Krishna had no more
desire for achieving or gaining anything in the world. Had
He wanted a kingdom all for Himself, He could have
easily carved out one, but He was in the battle-front only
with a sense of duty towards the noble and the righteous
cause the Pandavas stood for.
The life of the Lord till the very moment of the
Mahabharata war had been a perfect life of complete
detachment and even then --- even though there was
nothing He had not gained, nor had He anything further
to gain --- He was spending Himself constantly in activity,
as though work was to Him a rapturous game of
enthusiasm and joy.
CONTINUING THE SAME ARGUMENT, THE LORD
SAYS:
23. For, should I not ever engage Myself in action, without
relaxation, men would in every way follow My Path, O son of
Pritha.
Why should the Lord work? What would be the loss to the
generation if He were not to work at all? The masses
always imitate their leaders and heroes in their dress, in
216
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
their behaviour, in their moral values, in their actions, in
all the branches of their activities. They fix their measure
of perfection always by watching the standard of life of
their leaders. If the Lord did not continue to work without
relaxation, men also would follow in His wake and sink
themselves into inactivity and so into an unproductive
existence. In nature everything acts constantly and
sincerely. The entire Universe survives and sustains itself
by activity.
In these stanzas, as everywhere, all along in the Geeta, the
first person singular is used by Lord Krishna, not in the
sense of the Blue Boy of Vrindavana, but as the Atman, or
the Self-realised Man-of-Perfection. A liberated soul
realises himself to be nothing other than the Spirit, upon
which alone is the play of matter sustained, as the dream
is sustained upon the waker. If this God-principle, though
inactive in Itself, does not consistently serve the pluralistic
phenomenal world as its permanent substratum, the
world as it is now, cannot exist. The ocean never rises, in
spite of the billows. Yet, it is a fact that without the ocean
the waves cannot rise or dance. Similarly, if the Lord were
not to keep on activity serving the world, the cultural life
of the generation would stagnate.
"AND WHAT HARM IS THERE IF I DO NOT ACT?"...
THE LORD SAYS:
217
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
24. These worlds would perish if I did not perform action; I
would be the author of confusion of "castes, " and would destroy
these beings.
If I do not perform action, it will not be conducive to the
harmonious progress of the Universe, and the entire
super-structure of our scientific laws and calculations will
tumble down. The Universe is not a chaos; it is a cosmos.
Lawless-ness is not noticed anywhere in the working of
the cosmic forces.
The phenomenal happenings, the movement of the
planets, the rhythmic dance of the seasons, the music of
creation, the law of colours are all happening in a
harmony, implicitly obeying the law governing them all,
and this Law is otherwise called the Mighty Power of
Nature, or God. Lord Krishna, as an embodiment of God-
hood, is declaring here: "If I do not perform work, the
world would perish." Scientifically viewed, this
declaration is not a superstitious absurdity, acceptable
only to the blind believers, but it becomes a statement of
fact, which even the microscope-gazers cannot honestly
deny.
The Lord represents not only the law governing the outer
world of things and beings, but He is also the Law that
governs the inner world of thoughts and emotions. The
whole human society is divided into the four "castes"
(Varna), by the Hindu saints and sages, ON THE BASIS
OF THE INDIVIDUALS' MENTAL TEMPERAMENTS. In
218
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
case the law governing the inner psychological
temperaments is not functioning strictly, there will be
confusion in behaviour and instability in character. The
general translation "admixture of races" for "Varna-
Shankara" contains a mischievous suggestion for the
modern students inasmuch as they would directly
understand it as a Divine sanction for the "caste-tyrannies"
that are going on in the decadent Hindu society.
"SUPPOSE, ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU, ARJUNA,
THINK --- OR SUPPOSE, FOR THAT MATTER, ANY
OTHER MAN THINKS --- THAT ONE WHO HAS
ACHIEVED HIS GOAL OF SELF-REALISATION, EVEN
HE SHOULD WORK FOR THE WELFARE OF THE
OTHERS, ALTHOUGH FOR HIMSELF HE MAY HAVE
NOTHING MORE TO ACHIEVE OR GAIN"...
25. As the "ignorant" men act from attachment to action, O
Bharata, so should the "wise" men act without attachment,
wishing the welfare of the world.
It is very well known that all of us act in our own given
fields of activities with all enthusiasm and deep interest,
all day through, every day of the year and all through the
years of our entire life-time. An average member of
society is seen to wear himself out in the strain of constant
activity. Irrespective of his health, careless of the severity
of seasons, through joy and sorrow, man constantly strives
to earn and to hoard, to gain and to enjoy.
219
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here Krishna says that a Man-of-Self-realisation also
works in the world with as much diligence and sincerity,
tireless enthusiasm and energizing joy, burning hopes and
scalding fears, as any ordinary man striving in the
competitions of the market-place. The only difference
between the two is that, while the ignorant acts and is
motivated in his actions by his "attachments and anxieties
for the fruits," a man of Godly intentions or complete
Perfection will work in the world, without attachment,
only for the purpose of the redemption of the world.
This subtle difference between the activities of the "wise"
and the "ignorant" may not strike the modern reader as
very important unless his attention is directed towards its
universal application. It is the anxious "desire for the
fruits" that dissipates the finer and nobler energies in the
worker, and condemns his activity to utter failure. No
doubt, even a Man-of-God, when he acts, must bring into
his field of activity his own mind and intellect.
The mind can function only when it is attached to
something. It cannot remain alive, and yet, detached from
every thing. "Detachment of the mind" mentioned here is
only its "detachment from the FALSE irresistible
fascination for objects" and this is gained through the
process of "attaching itself to the NOBLER." Thus, when
Lord Krishna says
here, that the "wise" man should work "without
attachments" he immediately indicates how this can be
220
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
achieved. He advises Arjuna to act, "Desirous of guiding
the world"
(Loka-sangraha).
Attachment becomes a clog or a painful chain on us only
when it is extremely ego-centric. To the extent we work
for larger schemes to bless a vaster section of humanity, to
that extent the attachment loses its poison and comes to
bless the age. Many poisons serve as medicines in their
diluted form, while the same in a concentrated form can
bring instantaneous death! The ego and ego-centric
desires bind and destroy man, but to the extent he can lift
his identifications to include and accommodate in it,
larger sections of the living world, to that extent the
attachment gathers an ethical halo, a divine glow, and
becomes a cure for our subjective pains and imperfections.
Here the practical method suggested is that Arjuna should
work, unattached to his own ego-centric, limited concept
of himself and his relations, and he must enter into the
battle-field as a champion fighting for a cause, noble and
righteous, against the armies that have come up to
question and challenge the deathless 'values of higher
living' as propounded and upheld by the Hindu culture.
TO SUCH A MAN-OF-WISDOM WHO IS WORKING IN
SOCIETY FOR THE SERVICE OF MAN, THE
FOLLOWING ADVICE IS GIVEN:
221
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
26. Let no wise-man unsettle the minds of ignorant-people, who
are attached to action; he should engage them in all actions,
himself fulfilling them with devotion.
The chances are that when a man of equipoise and Self-
discovery enters the field of activity, he will be tempted to
advise his generation on pure ethics and abstract
ideologies. The generation, misunderstanding the words
and emphasis of such a Master, might come to a wrong
conclusion that, to renounce activity was the direct path to
Truth. The teachers are warned against such a hasty
guidance which might damp the enthusiasm of the
generation to act.
Life is dynamic. Nobody can sit idle. Even the idler
contributes to the general activity. In this ever-surging
onward rush of life's full impetuosity, if there be a foolish
guide who would plunge himself in the mid-stream and
stand with upraised hands, howling to the generation to
halt, he would certainly be pulverized by the ever-moving
flood of life and its endless activities. Many a hasty Master
has made this mistake and has had to pay for it. Krishna is
declaring here only a Universal law for the guidance of
the saints and sages of India that they should not go
against the spirit of the times and be a mere revolt against
life's own might and power.
In this stanza is given out the art of guiding mankind,
which can be used by every leader in all societies, be they
222
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
social workers, or political masters, or cultural teachers. A
society, that is functioning in a particular line of activity at
any given period of history, should not be, all of a sudden,
arrested in its flow, says Krishna, but the leader should
fall in line with the generation, and slowly and steadily
guide it to act in the right-direction, by his own example.
A traveller motoring with the idea of going to Hardwar
may miss his way and speed down towards Saharanpur,
but the way to guide him back to the main road is not to
halt him; because, by halting, he will never reach his own
destination, or any other goal. So long as the wheels are
not revolving on the road, distances are not covered.
Keeping the wheels on the move, he has to change the
direction of his movements until he comes to his right
path, heading towards Hardwar.
Similarly, man should act and even if he be acting in the
WRONG DIRECTION, through action alone can he come
to the RIGHT PATH of diviner activities, and gain the
fulfilment of his Perfection. No 'wise'-man should unsettle
his generation's firm faith in action. He must himself
diligently perform the ordinary actions in a diviner and
better fashion, and he must make himself an example to
the world, so that the lesser folk may automatically
imitate him and learn to follow his unfailing footsteps.
IN WHAT WAY IS AN 'IGNORANT MAN ATTACHED
TO ACTION?
223
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
27. All actions are performed, in all cases, merely by the
Qualities-in-Nature (GUNAS ) . He whose mind is deluded by
egoism, thinks "I am the doer. "
All along Krishna has been insisting that nobler actions
are actions without attachment. This is easier said than
done. Even if one intellectually accepts this idea, it is not
at all easy for him to act up to it. To everyone of us the
difficulty is that we know not how to get ourselves
detached from our activities, and still act on in the field.
The Lord gives here a method of discrimination by which
we can easily develop the required amount of detachment.
We had explained earlier how spiritual IGNORANCE
expresses itself at the intellectual level as DESIRES, which
again, in the mental zone, manifests as THOUGHTS, and
the very thoughts, coloured by our mental tendencies,
manifest themselves, in their fulfilment in the outer
world-of-objects, as our ACTIONS. Thus, the tendencies of
the mind (vasanas) express in the outerworld as actions.
Where there are noble-thoughts, there, noble-actions
manifest. When the thoughts are agitated, the actions also
are uncertain, faltering, and confused. And where the
thoughts are dull and animalistic, the actions generated
from them are also correspondingly base, vicious, and
cruel. Thus, the mind's projections in the outer-world are
in fact a kind of crystallisation of the mental Vasana
among the objects of the world and these constitute the
"actions."
224
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Where there is a mind, there actions also must be
performed. These actions are therefore GENERATED by
the mind, STRENGTHENED in the mind and ultimately
PERFORMED with the mind. But the individual, due to
his wrong identification with his own mind, gets the false
notion that he himself is the "actor" --- the "doer." This
action-arrogating-ego naturally starts feeling an anxiety
for its success and a burning attachment for the result of
its actions.
In a dream, we create a world of our own and we identify
ourselves with the world so made, and this IDENTIFIER is
called the 'dreamer.' We all know that the sorrows of the
dream all belong to the 'dreamer' and to no one else. The
'dreamer' is liberated from his pains when he ends his
identification with the dream kingdom. Similarly, the
actions in the world outside, which are nothing other than
the vasanas existing in one's own mind, cannot of
themselves give one any attachment, but the attachment is
felt by one who gets identified with one's own mental
conditions. The moment one understands this simple fact,
all one's attachments end, and therefore, one lives in
perfect peace.
This identification with the mental condition creates the
false sense of ego which arrogates to itself the idea: "I am
the doer." The "doer" demands the FRUITS OF HIS
ACTION. To get over this attachment is to end this
misconception.
225
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
BUT AS REGARDS THE 'WISE' MAN:
28. But he --- who knows the Truth, O mighty-armed, about the
divisions of the qualities and (their) functions, and he who
knows that GUNAS -as-senses move amidst GUNAS -as-
objects, is not attached.
As a contrast to the point-of-view of the 'ignorant' man
explained in the last stanza, Krishna explains here the
attitude of the 'wise' man when he ploughs the field of
activity. In him, attachment has no place, because of his
constant, discriminating understanding that in all
activities, it is his mind that projects out to form the action.
When once the 'wise' man has realised that actions belong
to the world of the mind, he is no more anxious for the
fruits thereof. Success and failure thereafter belong to the
mind and not to him. Likes and dislikes thereafter are of
the mind and not his. Loves and hatreds are not his but of
the mind. Thus, in complete inner freedom the God-man
functions, as a true sportsman in his play-field, where the
very enjoyment is in the sport and not in the score.
Here, Arjuna is addressed as the 'mighty-armed,' and this
is very significant in the mouth of Krishna at this moment.
The very term reminds us of Arjuna's wondrous heroism
as the greatest archer of his time. The implication is that a
true hero is not one who can face an army and kill a few,
but one who can save himself. A true warrior is only he
who can tirelessly fight in the inner world, and gain a
226
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
victory over his own mind and attachments. One who can
act in the world's battle-field of actions, ever ruling over
and never surrendering to the arrows of attachments that
fly towards one from all directions, is the real Immortal
Hero, who can thereafter sit unarmed on the chariots of
mortal heroes, and without raising any weapon, can guide
the destinies of many an army in every Kurukshetra! That
Master Hero is called Tattwavit --- one who "knows" the
Reality --- the Self.
NOW:
29. Those deluded by the qualities of nature, (GUNAS) , are
attached to the functions of the qualities. The Man-of-Perfect-
Knowledge should not unsettle the 'foolish, ' who are of
imperfect knowledge.
Although many know that all actions are the attempts of
the mental impressions to fulfil themselves in the outer
world, only the Perfect-one realises this Truth and
generally becomes quiet and unattached in all his
activities. The majority of us are in a state of complete
delusion and are entirely victimised by our own mental
temperaments. The flood of life, surging out through these
existing vasana-channels, should not be blockaded in the
activity. The advice given by Krishna in the earlier stanza
(26) is, again for the purpose of emphasis, repeated here in
different words.
227
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The dull-witted one, unconsciously victimised by his own
mental impressions, acts in the world outside shackled by
a thousand burning attachments. A sage or a saint should
not come into the arena of life to decry such a man's
activities all of a sudden. Krishna's suggestion is that,
while feeding the fire of life, he should carefully guide its
flow into the right channel wherein the flood of life can
reach to water the gardens of cultural development in the
individual as well as in the community.
"HOW THEN SHOULD ACTIONS BE PERFORMED BY
THE 'IGNORANT' MAN WHO SEEKS LIBERATION
FROM HIS OWN SENSE OF FINITUDE, WHEN HE IS
QUALIFIED ONLY FOR ACTION?" THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
30. Renouncing all actions in Me, with the mind centered on the
Self, free from hope and egoism (ownership) , free from (mental)
fever, (you) do fight!
It has been clearly declared that the Divine opinion of the
Lord is that Arjuna should fight. The Pandava prince is
not, at present, fit for the higher contemplative life of pure
meditation. Action has a tendency to create new
impressions which again procreate impulses to act more
vigorously. In order to avoid creation of new Vasanas even
while acting for the purpose of Vasana-exhaustion,
Krishna had already advised the method of acting without
the spirit of ego, or ego-centric desires. The same theory is
228
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
explained here while expounding a technique by which
this consummation can actually be brought about.
RENOUNCE ALL ACTIONS IN ME --- We have already
noticed that by the first-person pronoun Krishna means
the Supreme Self, the Divine, the Eternal. Renouncing all
activities unto Him, with a mind soaked with devoted
remembrances of the Self (Adhyatma Chetasa), the Lord
advises Arjuna to act on. Renunciation of action does not
mean an insipid life of inactivity. Actions performed
through attachment and desires are renounced the
moment we take away from action the ego-centric and the
selfish stink.
A serpent is dangerous only as long as its fangs are not
removed. The moment these are taken out, even the most
poisonous reptile becomes a tame creature incapable of
harming anyone. Similarly, action gives rise to bondage
only when it is performed with a heart laden with selfish-
desires. Actions performed without desires are not actions
at all, inasmuch as they are incapable of producing any
painful reactions. Here, the renunciation of action only
means the giving up of the wrong motives behind the
actions.
The purification of the motives is possible only when the
mind is made to sing constantly the Divine Songs praising
the glories of the Self. In the song of Truth the heart begins
to throb with the highest Divine impulses. Actions
performed in the outer world by such an individual are no
229
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
more the ordinary actions but they become expressions of
the Supreme Will through that individual. When the
limited ego is replaced by the constant feeling of the Lord
--- as "I am the Supreme" --- such an individual becomes
the most efficient instrument for the expression of the
Divine Will.
Not only is it sufficient that we renounce thus all wrong
actions, but we have also to make a few adjustments in
our inner instruments in order to bring out an
unobstructed flow of the Creator's Will through us. These
are indicated here by the two terms "without hope" and
"without ego."
A superficial study of the stanza is sure to confuse the
student and drive him to the dangerous conclusion that
Hinduism preaches, not a dynamic conscious life, but an
insentient existence through life in a spirit of cultivated
hopeless-ness! But a closer study of the import of these
two terms will make us understand clearly that, in this
stanza, Krishna is hinting at a great psychological truth of
life!
WITHOUT HOPE --- Hope is "the expectation of a
happening that is yet to manifest and mature in a
FUTURE PERIOD OF TIME." Whatever be the hope, it
belongs not to the present; it refers to a period of time not
yet born.
230
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WITHOUT EGO --- Our ego-centric concept of ourselves
is nothing but "a bundle of happenings and achievements
of ours which took place, or were gained, in the past
moments." Ego is therefore "the shadow of the past," and
it has an existent reality only with reference to THE DEAD
MOMENTS OF THE PAST.
If hope is thus the child of the unborn future, ego is the
lingering memory of a dead past. To revel in ego and hope
is an attempt on our part to live, either with the dead
moments of the past, or with the unborn moments of the
future. All the while, the tragedy is that we miss the
'present,' the active dynamic 'present,' which is the only
noble chance that is given to us to create, to advance, to
achieve, and to enjoy. Krishna advises Arjuna, therefore,
to act renouncing both hope and ego; and this is indeed a
primary instruction on how to pour the best that is in us
into the 'present,' blockading all unintelligent and
thoughtless dissipation of our inner-personality-energies,
in the 'past' and the 'future.'
The instruction is so exhaustive in vision, and complete in
its minutest details, that the stanza under review should
be a surprise even to the best of our modern
psychologists. Even though the technique so far advised
can, and does, avoid all wastage of energy among the
funeral pyres of the dead moments and in the wombs of
unborn Time, yet, there is a chance for the man of action
wasting his potentialities in the very 'present.' This
generally comes through our inborn nature to get
231
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ourselves unnecessarily over-anxious during our present
activities. This FEVERISH ANXIETY is indicated here by
the term "fever" (Jwara). Krishna advises that Arjuna
should renounce all actions unto the Lord and, getting rid
of both hope and selfishness, must fight, free from all
mental fever. How complete this technique is will be
evident now to all students of the Geeta.
The term "fight" is to be understood here "as our
individual fight with circumstances, in the silent battle of
life." Thus, the advice is not for Arjuna alone, but to all
men who would like to live life fully and intelligently!
The advice contained in this stanza reads as though quite
unorthodox for those who have read the Vedas, with a
limited meaning for its term "Karma-Yoga."
IN ORDER TO HAMMER THIS NEW
INTERPRETATION OF THE VEDIC TRUTH INTO THE
ACCEPTANCE OF HIS GENERATION, THE LORD
SAYS:
31. Those men who constantly practise this teaching of Mine,
full of faith and without cavilling, they too are freed from
actions.
It is clearly brought out here that the above technique can
bless us not by a mere study of it, but only when it has
been properly practised in life. The term religion (matam)
232
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in Sanskrit, means 'opinion.' This is "Krishna's opinion" ---
Sri Krishna's Matam. The philosophy of spirituality is
universal and, therefore, the same everywhere. But
religions differ from prophet to prophet, because there are
many different OPINIONS entertained by these different
Masters, regarding the best manner by which their
particular generations could be guided towards the final
experience of the Eternal-Factor.
One ought not to live through life as a mere beast of
burden doing its daily routine and sweating under the
driver's whip. Work only hardens the muscles; it can
smoothen out the ugly wrinkles in our character and add
a glow of health and vitality to our inner personality only
when we bring the inner equipments of our heart and
head into the work which our hands and legs perform in
the outer world. This is accomplished by pursuing the
Karma Yoga advised earlier, with full faith (Shraddha) and
without cavilling (Anasuyantah).
FAITH (Shraddha) --- is a very pregnant word in Sanskrit
which refuses to be defined fully by any single word in
English.
But Shankara's explanation of Shraddha has a purely
intellectual import and it has no direct emotional appeal
for the seeker. "Faith" in Vedanta means the ability to
digest mentally, and comprehend intellectually, the full
import of the advice of the Saints and the declarations of
the Scriptures. In fact without "faith" no activity is ever
233
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
possible; and "faith" cannot grow where intellectual
convictions have not come to play in their full blaze.
WITHOUT CAVILLING (Anasuyantah) --- A mere
intellectual theory cannot be understood and appreciated
without our adverse criticisms of it. We criticise to know
and understand more exhaustively a piece of knowledge.
But here, Krishna is advising a technique of living which
cannot fulfil itself in our life through mere criticism and
questioning. Krishna is warning Arjuna that he will
neither understand fully, not come to gain the blessings of
that Way-of-Life, by deep study and noisy discussions. It
can be understood and experienced ONLY by living it.
THEY TOO ARE FREED FROM WORK --- Immature
students of the Geeta have been seen to cool down in their
enthusiasm when they meet with the use of such terms.
All through the chapter Krishna was insisting that man
should act --- act diligently and rightly. All of a sudden He
points to a strange-looking goal, WORKLESSNESS.
Naturally, an intelligent reader immediately comes to feel
a disgust at this ugly paradox. This is mainly because of
our lack of appreciation of the term in its native Scriptural
import.
Earlier we have explained how the IGNORANCE of our
Spiritual Nature gives rise to DESIRES, which in their turn
cause THOUGHT-AGITATIONS, and also how WORK is
nothing other than thoughts fulfilled among the sense-
objects. Thus, the "State of Workless-ness," is itself the
234
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"State of Thoughtless-ness," which indicates the
"Condition of Desireless-ness." Absence of all desires can
come only when we rediscover the All-full Nature of the
Self. In short, with the Knowledge of the Self, when
spiritual "ignorance" is terminated, desires can no more
arise. Thus, the term "FREED FROM WORK" indicates the
state beyond "ignorance," or the State of Self-hood.
This Supreme State, no doubt, can never be reached
purely through work. Parliament Street is not the
Parliament; but having reached Parliament Street, the
Parliament cannot be very far away; one cannot miss
reaching the Parliament there. Similarly, Karma Yoga is
extolled here as the "Path" that takes one ultimately to the
Supreme, because through desireless activity one achieves
Vasana-purgation, thus making the mind purer and
subtler for meditative purposes.
AS CONTRASTED WITH THE ABOVE, SHRI KRISHNA
EXPLAINS WHAT HAPPENS TO THOSE WHO CARP
AT THIS THEORY OF RIGHT ACTION:
32. But those who carp at My teaching and do not practice it,
deluded in all knowledge, and devoid of discrimination, know
them to be doomed to destruction.
"Those who decry this great teaching of Mine and do not
practise it," Krishna warns His students, "will become
235
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
more and more deluded and will lose their
discrimination."
Man is encouraged to follow a life-of-action, only when he
comes to appreciate that Way-of-Life completely in his
understanding. When the very theory is decried, it is no
longer conducive to the intellect to accept it. Thus,
decrying a philosophy is a sign of one's intellectual
rejection of it. Having once rejected intellectually, there is
no chance of an individual ever striving to live that
philosophy. Karma Yoga is a way-of-life, and we have to
live it if we want to come under its grace.
The Path-of-Work lies through a process of elimination of
the desires in us. When the ego and ego-centric desires are
eliminated, the work accomplished through such an
individual is the true divine action, which is destined to
having enduring achievements. To the extent man is NOT
practising this efficient Way-of-Work, he would grow
necessarily unintelligent, and to that extent, his
discriminative capacity will deteriorate and ultimately get
destroyed.
The blessing, because of which man is considered superior
to animals, is his divine faculty of discrimination. An
intellect, strengthened by its own intrinsic capacity to
distinguish between the Real and the unreal, the right and
the wrong, is the mighty instrument of self-development
in man. When this instrument is destroyed, man comes to
behave in no better way than a biped animal; panting on
236
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the path of existence, bullied by its own lower instincts of
miserable passions and low appetites. Naturally, he fails
to make any true gain out of his life's chances, and finally
destroys himself.
THEN WHY DO NOT MEN FOLLOW THIS DOCTRINE
AND PERFORM THEIR DUTIES FULLY? WHY SHOULD
THEY FOLLOW OTHERS, OR ACT ON THEIR OWN? IN
DISOBEYING KRISHNA, WHY ARE THEY NOT
AFRAID OF TRANSGRESSING THE LORD'S
COMMANDS? THE LORD SAYS:
33. Even a wise man acts in accordance with his own nature;
beings will follow their own nature; what can restraint do?
Even the man-of-knowledge acts in conformity with his
own nature, which is determined by the pattern of
thoughts that arise in him. At any given instant of time,
each one of us is determined by the thoughts that are in us
at that moment; and the thoughts in us always get
patternised by the channels of thinking, designed by the
thoughts which we had entertained in the past. The nature
of each individual is decided by the style of thinking
which each is capable of.
The man-of-knowledge mentioned here indicates one who
has read and understood thoroughly the "technique of
action" as explained in this chapter. Even when he knows
the technique, the Lord says that it is not easy for him to
237
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
follow it, because his mind is designed to carry his
thoughts through ego-centric and selfish channels, ever
panting to gain some desires. Because of these past
impressions (vasanas), even an honest student finds it hard
to practise this simple-looking technique in his life. The
reason is quite universal: "BEINGS FOLLOW THEIR
OWN NATURE." Naturally "WHAT CAN RESTRAINT
DO" when nature is too powerful?
This last statement in the stanza "WHAT CAN
RESTRAINT DO?" is not a cry of despair in Krishna's
philosophy, but it is the honest all-seeing vision of the
philosopher in Krishna, who recognises that the higher
ways of living are not meant for all. Men crowding on the
lowest rung of the evolutionary ladder, overwhelmed by
their own animal passions, find themselves incapable of
renouncing them, and are, therefore, incapacitated to walk
the Path-of-Action. It is only a slightly evolved entity, full
of enthusiasm, activity and a passion for progress (Rajo-
guna), who can follow this sacred "path" and benefit
himself. This honest confession shows the broad-
mindedness and tolerance of Krishna, the Universal
Teacher.
IF EVERY BEING ACTS ONLY ACCORDING TO HIS
OWN NATURE --- AND THERE IS NONE THAT HAS
NOT A NATURE OF HIS OWN --- THEN, THERE IS NO
SCOPE FOR PERSONAL EXERTION AND THE
TEACHING BECOMES PURPOSELESS. THE LORD
EXPLAINS AS FOLLOWS:
238
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
34. Attachment and aversion for the objects of the senses abide
in the senses; let none come under their sway; for they are his
foes.
In the last stanza, it is said that, even a man, well-read in
the Shastras, cannot easily follow the highly ethical life
which is demanded of a spiritual seeker, because his lower
nature proves too strong for him. Prescribing a medicine
which is not available, is not the art of healing. It is the
philosopher's duty, not only to indicate the weaknesses in
our present life and the State-of-Perfection, but he must
also show us ways and means by which we can transport
ourselves from our weaknesses into this ideal State-of-
Perfection. Then, and then alone, can the philosopher
bless his generation.
Krishna indicates here the great robber in the 'within' of
man, which loots away the true joys and thrills of 'right
living.' Attachments and aversions of the sense-organs for
their respective sense-objects are instictive, and natural, in
every one. The sense-objects by themselves are incapable
of bringing any wave of sorrow or agitation into the
'within.' We get agitated and disturbed not at our sense-
organs, but in our mind. The mind gets disturbed because,
when the stimuli reach the mind, it accepts, in its inherent
mischief, certain types of stimuli as GOOD, and their
opposites as BAD. Thereafter, it gets attached to the
stimuli it experiences as good and develops an aversion
for the opposite type of stimuli. Now the mind is prepared
239
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
to suffer the agonies of existence in the sorrowful
plurality. Whenever it comes in contact with the infinite
number of objects outside, it pants to court the things of
its own attachment and labours to run away from the
things of its own aversion. This excitement of the mind is
truly 'its tragedy.'
Having stated this Truth, Krishna advises all seekers:
"LET NONE COME UNDER THEIR SWAY."
The philosophy of Geeta does not suggest, even in its
implications, any kind of running away from the world-
of-sense-objects. Krishna's creed is to live HERE and
NOW, in the midst of situations in life, in this very world,
and to experience them through our sacred vehicles of the
body, mind, and intellect. The only insistence is that on all
occasions, a wise man should be a master of the vehicles
and not a helpless victim of these matter-envelopments.
And the secret of this mastery in life is to live free from the
tyrannies of attachments and aversions.
In order to detach ourselves from both our likes and
dislikes, we have to get rid of our false ego-centric
vanities. Likes and dislikes belong to the ego. Therefore,
all ego-less acts, as we have explained earlier, accomplish
a purgation of Vasanas. Vasanas create the mind; where the
mind is, there revels the ego. To the extent the Vasanas
have been reduced, to that extent the mind has become
non-existent. Where the mind has ended, there the
240
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
reflection of the Consciousness called the "ego" has also
ended.
THE METHODS BY WHICH WE CAN BRING ABOUT
THE VASANA-PURGATION ARE EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
35. Better is one's own 'duty' , though devoid of merit, than the
'duty' of another well discharged. Better is death in one's own
'duty' ; the 'duty' of another is fraught with fear (is productive
of positive danger) .
The word Dharma in Sanskrit is the most elusive word for
translation into English. It is used generally in more than
one definite meaning. Terms like righteousness, good
conduct, duty, noble quality, etc., are some of them. We
have explained it earlier and found how Dharma
essentially means "the Law of being" of anything in the
world.
That which determines one man's personality as distinctly
different from another's, it is very well known, is the
texture of the thoughts entertained by him. This texture of
his thoughts is, again, in its turn, determined by the
pattern of thinking (vasanas), which his mind has gained
from its own past. These pre-determined 'channels-of-
thinking' created by one's own earlier ways of thinking are
called the Vasanas. Thus Dharma should be conceived here
as the Vasanas in our mind, for no other explanation will
241
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
be correct since the very discussion now is upon mental
control. The word "duty," used by us in our translation, is,
in this special sense, to be understood as Vasanas."
Swadharma AND Para dharma --- Swadharma is not the duty
which accrues to an individual because of his "caste,"
which is ever a sheer accident of birth. In its right import
Swadharma means the type of Vasanas that one discovers in
one's own mind. To act according to one's own taste,
inborn and natural, is the only known method of living in
peaceand joy, in success and satisfaction. To act against
thegrain of one's own Vasanas would be acting in terms of
Para dharma --- and that this is fraught with danger is very
well known.
In the context of the Geeta, there is a direct message for
Arjuna. Arjuna is born a prince, trained in the art of war
and has exhibited in his life his insatiable thirst for
heroism and adventure. Naturally, his Swadharma is that
of a prince and that can find fulfilment only in dangerous
actions and endless exertions. Perhaps, as it was evident
in the first chapter, Prince Arjuna had gathered during his
early education, that the life of renunciation and
meditation --- the life of a Brahmin --- was nobler than his
own life. And therefore, he wanted to run away from the
battle-field into the silent caves-of-meditation. In this
stanza, Krishna reminds him that to act according to his
own Vasanas, even imperfectly, is the right path for his
development. It is dangerous to suppress his own
242
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
personality-expression and copy the activities of someone
else, even if he be living a nobler and diviner life.
THOUGH THE SOURCE OF EVIL HAS BEEN POINTED
OUT EARLIER (II-62 AND III-34), YET WITH A VIEW TO
ELICITING A CONCISE AND CLEAR STATEMENT OF
WHAT WAS BUT DESULTORILY AND VAGUELY
EXPRESSED ARJUNA ASKS:
Arjuna said: 36. But, by what impelled does man commit sin,
though against his wishes, O Varshneya, constrained, as it
were, by force?
Following the tradition of the scriptures, the disciple now
asks a definite question upon the very theme of the
discussion. The very question shows that Arjuna has, to a
large extent, got out of the hasty conclusions which he
exhibited until the beginning of the second chapter. He
has become introspective, and therefore, conscious of
certain forces working within himself that were ruining
and obstructing the play of his own higher impulses. The
doubt is couched in such familiar words that it appears as
though it is a doubt raised by some student of our own
times.
There is no living man who has not in himself a
sufficiently clear conception of the good and the
meritorious. Every one understands intellectually what is
RIGHT, but it is only when it comes to action that one
243
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
invariably gets tempted to do the WRONG. This
paradoxical confusion, between one's ideology and one's
own actions, becomes quite a big problem to all those who
try to introspect and review themselves.
The Divine in us, with Its nobler aspirations, wants to
fulfil Itself with Its higher impulses and subtler
achievements, but the animal instinct in us tempts us
away, and we walk the path of the baser joys of the flesh.
This invariably happens even against our own wishes.
Arjuna is enquiring of the Lord: "What is the exact nature
of this SATAN-in-our-bosom which thus systematically
loots away the good in us?"
Varshneya is the name of Lord Krishna, meaning: "One
born in the family of the Vrishnis."
THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN. I SHALL TELL YOU WHO
THAT ENEMY IS OF WHOM YOU ASK --- WHO IS THE
SOURCE OF ALL EVIL":
The Blessed Lord Said: 37. It is desire, it is anger born of the
"active, " all-devouring, all-sinful; know this as the foe here (in
this world) .
IT IS DESIRE, IT IS WRATH --- Desire is the inner SATAN
in the individual's bosom. We have seen earlier that desire
is nothing other than our own spiritual "ignorance,"
expressing itself in our intellectual personality. This
244
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
statement in the stanza is not to be understood as
enumerating two different things. "Desire" itself, under
certain circumstances, gains expression as "anger." A
constant agitation of the mind, expressing as an
uncontrollable impatience to gain something, is called
"desire." Desire is generally for something other than
ourselves. In the clash of existence, beings and
circumstances may come between ourselves and the
"object of our desire," and in such cases, our "desire" ---
impulses, striking at the obstacle, gain the ugly look of
"wrath."
Thus, whenever emotions for acquisition and possession
of an object flow incessantly towards that object, the
bundle of thoughts so flowing is called "desire;" while the
same emotions, when they get obstructed from reaching
their desired objects, and get refracted at an intermediate
obstacle, are called "anger." This "desire-anger-emotion" is
the very SATAN in us that compels us to compromise
with our own intellectually known Higher values of
existence, and tempts us to perpetrate sins. Greater the
desire, greater the power in the pull towards the sinful
and the low. Once desire has come to manifest itself in our
intellect, it enshrouds the wisdom in us.
Desire and anger, and their numberless children of sin
and sorrow, must ever come to breed upon the marshy
lands of our deluded intellect. To come under their sway
is "ignorance." To come to rule over them is "Wisdom."
245
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE LORD NOW ILLUSTRATES HOW DESIRE IS OUR
FOE AND HOW IT VEILS OUR DISCRIMINATION:
38. As fire is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by dust, as an
embryo by the womb, so this (wisdom) is enveloped by that
(desire or anger) .
Three different examples have been given to illustrate
how desires and the consequent anger delude our rational
capacity and choke our discrimination. Repetition is an
unpardonable crime against the "scriptural-style," and the
Geeta faithfully follows the immortal style common to all
Bibles of the world. There is no redundancy, or wasteful
repetition in the Divine Song. With this understanding,
when we try to readthe stanza we find that there are
subtle implications in the three different illustrations used
by the Lord. More is meant here than meets the eye.
The discrimination in man is screened off and obstructed
in its exercise due to the attachment in his mind for the
ever-changing worldly-objects. We all know that our
attachments to things can fall under three distinct
categories. Our desires can either be low and vicious ---
mind for the flesh-fleshy carnal pleasures --- or our
ambitions may be for an active exertion in order to achieve
power and wealth, to gain strength and might, to win
fame and glory. There can also be a burning aspiration to
strive and to achieve a diviner perfection and a Godly
Self-illumination. Thus, our desires can fall under three
246
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
headings according to the quality of the attachment ---
inert (Tamasic), or active (Rajasic), or noble and divine
(Sattwic). The veilings that are created over our
discrimination by these different types of qualities (gunas)
are indicated here by the three different examples.
AS FIRE BY SMOKE --- A smoky fire-place, shrouded by
dark curling smoke can sometimes, if not totally, at least
partially, veil the brilliance of the light emitted by the
flames. A wick without a chimney is less bright than with
a chimney, proving the example under review. Even
Sattwic desires veil the infinite glory of the Spirit.
AS DUST ON A MIRROR --- This illustrates the veiling
caused by agitations that cover the purer intellect due to
our thick desires for glory and power (Rajasic). Compared
with the former, this is indeed more complete, and the
removal of it is, naturally, more difficult. The smoke rolls
off even at a passing whiff of breeze, while the mirror
cannot be cleaned even by a storm. It can be polished only
by our own efforts at dusting it clean with the help of a
clean, dry duster. Through the smoke, however thick it
might be, the fire can be perceived; through the dust, if it
be thick, no reflection at all can be seen in the mirror --- if
at all seen it will only be dim.
AS THE FOETUS IN THE WOMB --- This is an illustration
to show how completely the Diviner aspect in us is
screened off by the low animal appetites and the vulgar
desires for the sensuous. The foetus is covered by the
247
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
womb until it matures, and there is no method of
observing it as long as it is in the womb. The veiling is
complete, and it can drop off only after a definite period of
time. Similarly, the desires for the flesh-fleshy enjoyments
build, as it were, a womb around the discriminative
power in us, and such low mental pre-occupations
(Tamasic) can drop off only after a longer period of
evolutionary growth undergone by such a deluded mind-
and-intellect.
In the true scriptural style, Krishna thus distinguishes
between the different textures in the veils that come to
cover the soul when the individual is entertaining
different types of desires. In short, desire is that which
hides the Divine in us.
IN THIS STANZA IT IS NOT CLEARLY STATED,
WHICH COVERS WHAT; THE LITERAL
TRANSLATION OF THE WORDS AS THEY STAND IN
THIS COUPLET ONLY SAYS, "SO IS THIS COVERED BY
IT." THE TWO PRONOUNS, 'IT' AND 'THIS,' ARE
DEFINED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA AND
THEREIN WE FIND AN EXPLANATION OF BOTH:
39. Enveloped, O Son of Kunti, is 'wisdom' by this constant
enemy of the wise in the form of 'desire, ' which is difficult to be
appeased, like fire.
248
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This stanza vividly explains to us that discrimination
(Jnana) the capacity to distinguish the Real from the
unreal, the permanent from the impermanent, the true
from the false, which gives man his higher status in the
scale of evolution --- is the divine faculty that gets
screened off from us due to our own greedy and insatiable
desires. The pronouns in the previous stanza now stand
clearly elucidated: the "discriminative capacity" in us (it ---
idam) gets screened off by the insatiable "desires" (by this -
-- tena).
HE NOW TELLS US WHICH ARE THE SEATS OF
'DESIRE,' WHICH, BY ENVELOPING WISDOM, FORMS
THE ENEMY OF THE WHOLE WORLD. THE SEAT OF
THE ENEMY BEING KNOWN, IT IS EASY TO KILL IT:
40. The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be its seat;
through these, it deludes the embodied by veiling his wisdom.
As a true soldier, Arjuna understands that there is an
inner enemy called "desire," which, like an efficient
saboteur, undermines the wealth and security of his inner
kingdom; and as a true prince, the royal demand of
Arjuna is for immediate information as to the exact hide-
out of this dangerous bandit. Krishna, as the spiritual
teacher, has to indicate to his adventurous student where
exactly the den of this devil is, from where he plans his
nefarious activities. Indicating the secret fortresses of this
249
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
inner enemy "desire," the Lord says, "the senses, the mind,
and the intellect are said to be its
seats of action."
A true criminal, functioning as an efficient leader of a
gang, operating in a large area, will generally have more
places than one to function from. Three main offices, from
where "desire," in different forms, functions to destroy the
peace and health of our inner life, have been indicated
here very clearly.
The sense-organs, functioning without restraint in the
world of sense-objects, are a very convenient theatre for
"desire" to function in. When the external stimuli reach the
mind through the sense-organs, the mind also becomes a
breeding centre of sorrows created by "desire." Lastly, the
intellect, working and playing with the memories of the
sense-enjoyments it had lived, and of the mental
attachments it had entertained, becomes yet another safe
den for "desire" to function from.
The deluded ego, foolishly identifying with the body,
desires sense-enjoyments. Thoughtlessly identifying with
the mind, it thirsts to experience more and more
emotional satisfactions. And lastly, identifying with the
intellect, it plans to re-live the remembered experiences of
sense-enjoyments and mental-joys.
250
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
TO HUNT FOR "DESIRE" IN THESE THREE HIDE-OUTS
IS TO COME, AT LAST, FACE TO FACE WITH IT. HOW
FINALLY TO OVERCOME THIS INNER ENEMY IS
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
41. Therefore, O best of the Bharatas, controlling first the
senses, kill this sinful thing, the destroyer of knowledge and
wisdom.
As indicated earlier, Krishna declares a truth only when
he has exhausted all the logical arguments leading to it.
After giving all the arguments, he summarises here:
"therefore, restrain the senses first," so that you may
finally throw overboard the inner enemy "desire."
"Desire" is called sinful, since, in its grosser
manifestations, it tends to make us live and work
satisfying our lower nature, and thus persuades us to live
a lower devolutionary life. Even at its best (Sattwic), like
"the smoke that covers the fire," "desire" does not allow
the full dawn of the Infinite, which is the Self in us. Thus,
"desire," in all its textures, contributes to the sins of man,
and, therefore, it is styled here as "THE SINFUL THING."
It is easy for a doctor to prescribe a medicine for my
wound and promise me an immediate healing. It is indeed
consoling to have the prescription in my hand. But, I am
sure, I will never gain a cure if the prescription requires
me to prepare an ointment out of "sky-flowers." Similarly,
251
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
it is quite a dignified advice for a spiritual Master to
declare, "control the senses and cast off the 'desires,' O
man!" --- But, unless the teacher gives us a method by
which we can get this prescription dispensed, it will be as
useless as the "sky-flower-treatment" for my painful
wound.
WHERE SHOULD ONE TAKE ONE'S STAND, AND
CAST OFF THE DESIRES?"... THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
42. They say that the senses are superior (to the body) ; superior
to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect;
one who is even superior to the intellect is He, (the Atman ) .
This and the following stanza with which Vyasa
concludes the third chapter of his incomparable Geeta,
give every seeker a perfect technique by which he can
bring about a successful hunting and capture of his inner
enemy, "desire."
Although we cannot expect in the Bhagawad Geeta ---
especially in one of the very opening chapters --- an
exhaustive treatment of the technique of meditation, yet
we find that, in these stanzas, the Lord has etched out a
complete outline of the "Scheme-for-Self-discovery."
Compared with the objects of the world, we can easily
understand that the sense-organs are more sacred and
divine. Of the instruments that constitute our physical
252
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
structure, certainly the sense-organs are subtler than the
organs-of-action. Everyone of us can easily experience that
our mind controls and orders our sense-organs, and,
therefore, we know that the mind is subtler than the
Indriyas.
No doubt, the mind has a vast kingdom to roam about in,
but, even so, it has its own limitations and fixed frontiers.
From knowledge to knowledge we extend the frontiers of
our mind and all along this aggressive march of new
conquests it is the intellect that first crosses the existing
frontiers of the mind, and wins for it the neighbouring
kingdoms of "fresh knowledge." In this sense, the intellect
has a greater pervasiveness than the mind, and, therefore,
it is conceived of as being subtler than the mind. That
which lies beyond the intellect is called the Supreme, the
Atman.
The Consciousness in man which lights up the very
intellectual ideas in him must necessarily be subtler than
the intellect itself. In the Upanishads it has been finally
declared that there is nothing subtler than the Self, the
Atman. The technique of meditation lies in the conscious
withdrawal of all our identifications with our body, mind
and intellect. All efforts end when we have thus gathered
our entire awareness from its delusory pre-occupations
and made it live in Itself as Itself --- as Objectless
Awareness.
253
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE GOAL GAINED BY PURSUING THIS ART OF
MEDITATION IS EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING:
43. Thus knowing Him, who is superior to intellect, and
restraining the self by the Self, slay you, O mighty-armed, the
enemy in the form of 'desire, ' no doubt hard indeed to conquer.
With this stanza, not only does the chapter conclude, but,
the special advice demanded by Arjuna has also been
finally given. Through 'knowledge' alone is
'ignorance'ended; through a lived experience of the Self
alone can we end our 'ignorance-of-the-Self.' This spiritual
'ignorance,' we have already found, creates 'desires.' The
Lord has indicated earlier that 'desire' functions and
thrives in the fields of the sense-organs, the mind, and the
intellect. Through the processes of meditation, when we
withdraw from our false identifications with the objects,
the body and the mind, the 'desire'-faculty, that was till
now roaming about and functioning in the outer fields, is
gathered and established in the intellect.
As long as we maintain in ourselves the limiting adjuncts
of the matter-envelopments, so long we cannot realise our
divine potentialities, but instead, in our delusion, we will
understand ourselves to be nothing more than the little
ego --- limited, bound, finite and ever-sobbing. After the
re-discovery of our own diviner existence we will be able
to live "restraining the self by the Self." In a perfect
Buddha's life, his ego functions completely under the
254
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
control of the diviner in him. No more then can the
'desire'-impulses, if at all they arise in the mind, play their
mischiefs and bring about any devastations in his inner
life.
It is very interesting to note that the philosophy of the
Geeta preaches a constructive re-organisation of life and
not the destruction or rejection of life's possibilities.
"Desire," being a painful leprous oozing wound, we are
lovingly advised about the balm to cure the malady, and
to live thereafter, in all efficiency, as a Master of
circumstances and a Lord of our own emotions. A seeker
who has accomplished this in himself is called a God-man,
a Sage, a Prophet!
Thus in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, in
the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the third discourse
ends entitled: THE KARMA YOGA
This chapter is called Karma Yoga. The term Yoga means
the act of connecting the lower with the higher, through a
technique consisting of one's own self-evolution. Any
method by which the lower in us is educated and trained
to live a Higher way-of-life --- wherein we gain a more
effective control upon both our life without and life within
--- is called Yoga.
Here is a method of self-development pointed out to the
Arjuna-type of men, who, fully armed and standing on the
255
