Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 8
Akshara Brahma Yoga
The Yoga of Imperishable Brahman
Arjuna said: 1. What is that BRAHMAN? What is the
ADHYATMA ? What is 'action' ? O best among men, what is
declared to be the ADHIBHUTA? And what is ADHIDAIVA
said to be?
2. Who, and how, is ADHIYAJNA here in this body, O
destroyer of Madhu? And how, at the time of death, are you to
be known by the self-controlled?
The new technical terms, used all of a sudden in the last
two stanzas of the previous chapter (the Essential Being,
the Essential Deity, the Essential Sacrifice etc.), which are
to be known so that such Men-of-Wisdom "CONTINUE
TO KNOW ME EVEN AT THE TIME OF DEATH
STEADFAST IN MIND" (VII-30) confuse Arjuna.
The chapter opens with the seeker questioning his teacher
with a view to get an exact definition for each new term
563
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
used in His learned discourse. Not only does Arjuna ask
for an explanation of the terms used, but he is also anxious
to know how exactly one can realise the Self at the time of
death, when one gains perfect self-control as a result of
one's constant spiritual practices in life.
THE LORD EXPLAINS EACH TERM EXHAUSTIVELY
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
The Blessed Lord said: 3 . BRAHMAN is Imperishable, the
Supreme; His essential nature is called Self-knowledge, the
creative force that causes beings to spring forth into
manifestation is called "work. "
4. ADHIBHUTA (or elements) constitutes My perishable
nature, and the Indweller (or the essence) is the
ADHIDAIVATA; I alone am the ADHIYAJNA here, in this
body, O best of the embodied.
IMPERISHABLE IS THE SUPREME BRAHMAN --- The
term Brahman indicates the one changeless and
imperishable subjective Essence behind the phenomenal
world. It becomes the Self, the Conscious Principle which
illumines the body, mind and intellect, during all their
pilgrimages from birth to death through the infinite
varieties of their vicissitudes.
ITS PRESENCE IN EACH INDIVIDUAL BODY IS
CALLED ADHYATMA --- Though the Self is formless and
subtle, and therefore, all-pervading, Its glory and might,
564
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
power and grace, are felt, experienced and lived by each
physical structure; and this Self, expressing Itself through
a given embodiment, as though conditioned by it, is called
the Adhyatma. Shankara brings it out very clearly when he
explains the term as, "THE PRINCIPLE THAT GRACES
ALL BODIES AS THEIR ESSENTIAL SELF."
Work is not only the turn-over; the turn-over can be
ordered and brought about by sheer labour. The term
'work' connotes something deeper, subtler, diviner. The
creative urge that is behind every active intellect, which
ultimately fulfils itself in the creation of things and beings,
that subtle spiritual strength is called "karma"; all else is
mere sweat and toil, dust and blood, heaving and sobbing,
smiling and singing, hoarding and wasting.
THE ADHIBHUTA IS THE PERISHABLE EXISTENCE ---
As a contrast to the Imperishable (Akshara) is the
'perishable-equipment' (Kshara), the world of prakriti,
through which the potential dynamism, vigour and glory
of the Infinite Self express themselves. Between the Kshara
and Akshara, there is as much difference as between a
steam-engine and the steam, a running car and the horse-
power in the petrol, a singing radio and the electric
current that makes it possible for the radio to sing. In
short, by the term 'perishable' (kshara) the whole world of
phenomena of the Universe is indicated. Subjectively, the
equipments of cognition, feeling, and perception
constitute, in the main, the destructible or the perishable
factors in us.
565
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ADHIDAIVA IS THE INDWELLER --- The term Indweller
(Adhidaiva) is used to indicate the "special faculty" that
presides over each apparatus of knowledge and activity in
the living creatures (the Purushah). The presiding deities of
the sense-organs, of the mind, and of the intellect, are
called the Devatas, which are nothing other than the
faculty of vision in the eyes, the faculty of audition in the
ears, the power of smelling in the nose, and so on.
Adhiyajna, HERE IN THIS BODY, I ALONE AM --- We
have already seen that the Yajna here means the "act of
perception, feeling, or thought." As in the Yajna, here also
oblations --- the sense-objects --- are poured into the Yajna-
altar --- the sense-organs --- when the Devata --- the
particular faculty in it --- gets propitiated and invoked,
and as a blessing from it we gain the "fruit" thereof, viz.,
the knowledge of the perception. In this Adhiyajna, in the
subjective Yajna-act of perception, it is quite evident that
the One Vital Factor that dominates the entire activity is
the Self, the Principle of Life.
By giving these definitions, the Lord is on the whole
suggesting with a subtle under-current of the
implications, that the Eternal Self alone is the Real, and
that all else are delusory super-impositions upon it.
Therefore, to know the Self is to know everything and
having known the Eternal as one's own Real Nature, one
is free to act or not to act, and to play or not to play, in any
of the fields of the not-Self.
566
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
An individual who lives in the Awareness of this
Knowledge, ever-conscious of the play of the Self at all
levels of his personality --- physical, mental and
intellectual --- such an individual, naturally, comes to
experience himself as a Divine Witness, observing the
very process of death that clips off layer by layer his self-
chosen connections with
the not-Self!
WHAT HAPPENS TO ONE WHO LEAVES THE BODY
IN THE AWARENESS OF THE SELF? LISTEN:
5. And whosoever, leaving the body, goes forth remembering Me
alone, at the time of his death, he attains My being; there is no
doubt about this.
Vyasa is never tired of emphasizing the cardinal
philosophical idea in Vedanta that an individualised ego
continues identifying with a given physical body only so
long as it needs that particular instrument for eking out its
desired quota of experiences. Once it is over, it 'kicks the
bucket,' as it were, and walks off --- forgetting all its
duties, its relationships and its vanities in that particular
existence. At this moment of divorce from a given body it
is logical to believe that its thoughts would be about the
most predominant desire or aspiration in it --- either
gathered in its past embodiments, or acquired in its
present life. The techniques of meditation and devotion
567
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
constitute the art of tutoring the mind to keep in it an
unflickering flame of aspiration, so carefully trimmed and
fed that such a seeker, "AT THE TIME OF DEATH,
MEDITATING ON ME ALONE, GOES FORTH LEAVING
THE BODY."
This last powerful willing, determined by the last thought,
decides its destinies in the future. An ego that lived all its
life, in its ego-centric vanities, identifying Itself with
merely the flesh and ever catering to its appetities, will be
hoarding such sensuous vasanas that it must necessarily
take a form, lower in the evolutionary scale, in order that
its acquired animal instincts may thereby be fulfilled to
the maximum.
On the other hand, when an individual, in his
discrimination, comes to recognise the futility of a
lascivious life, and, therefore, aspires to release himself
from the thraldom of the flesh, he surely moves higher up
on the ladder of evolution when he retires from his
present embodiment. Faithfully following this theory
which is at once logical and reasonable, the Science of Life,
as enunciated in Vedanta, declares that the last thoughts of
a dying man order his future embodiments and their
environments.
Therefore, Krishna insists here that one who leaves the
physical structure with his mind completely turned
towards the Self will, naturally, reach the Eternal and the
568
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Immortal, "THE SUPREME ABODE, reaching which there
is no return" (VIII-21).
BUT THEN, ARE THERE NO ARGUMENTS THAT CAN
CONCLUSIVELY PROVE THE STATEMENT? LISTEN:
6. Whosoever, at the end, leaves the body, thinking of any being,
to that being only he goes, O Kaunteya (O son of Kunti) ,
because of his constant thought of that being.
Declaring this well-thought-out conclusion of the Rishis,
the Self-dedicated thinkers of India, the Lord says
"WHATEVER OBJECT ONE REMEMBERS WHILE
LEAVING THE BODY, THAT ALONE IS REACHED BY
HIM" --- be it a dog or a god.
"As you think so you become" is a theory which is obvious
to every intelligent man even without an explanation from
any philosopher. Thoughts guide all actions, and at any
given moment the run of thoughts in an individual is
governed and ordered by the channel of thinking, which
he himself has ploughed in his bosom with his conscious
and wilful thoughts and actions in the past. Naturally,
therefore, a mental equipment that has been struggling
during its existence in an embodiment to detach from all
its identifications with that embodiment, and to fix itself
in the contemplation of the Real and the Eternal, would be
creating new channels of divine aspirations (Adhyatma
Samskaras). The time of death, when the occupant of the
569
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
body has packed up to quit, is not the moment to decide
or to plan the travel. At such a moment, instinctively, its
thoughts would run through its habitual channels, and the
flight of thoughts at that moment would determine the
direction of the ego's pilgrimage.
THEREFORE:
7. Therefore, at all times, remember Me, and fight, with mind
and intellect fixed (or absorbed) in Me; you shall doubtless come
to Me alone.
No religion can continuously serve the society unless it
gives its faithful followers specific instructions and
guidance on how best to live their day-to-day life. Here is
an instruction which is at once applicable in the secular
fields of living and in the divine realms of life. Here is a
simple instruction by which not only the STANDARD OF
LIVING could be raised but also the STANDARD OF LIFE
could be divinised.
There are many who suspect that this method of splitting
the mind between religion and life is detrimental to true
success in either of them. This, in fact, is a thoughtless
argument. Hardly ever is man's mind totally invested
where his hands function. Ordinarily, a major portion of
the mind, all the time, wanders into the jungles of
dreadful fears, or into the caves of jealousies or into the
deserts of imaginary possibilities of failures. Instead of
570
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
thus wasting the total mental energy and dynamism,
Krishna advises us that a truly successful man, striving to
achieve the highest, both in the outer world of plurality,
and in the realms within, should rest his mind at the
gracious and peaceful feet of Truth. He can then pour out
the entire wealth of his capacities into the work in his
hand, and thereby assure for himself the highest laurels
both here and in the hereafter.
In Hinduism, religion is not divorced from life. If they are
separated, both of them will die away. They are as
intimately connected as the head and the trunk; separated
from the other neither can live. Even while living through
the turmoils of existence, a true seeker must learn to keep
his mind continuously upon the awareness of his Real
Nature and the Substratum of the world in one vast
embrace of blissful homogeneity. This is not difficult, nor
is it impracticable.
An actor, playing the part of a king in a drama, can never
completely forget that he has a wife and a child in his own
house on the outskirts of the city. If he forgets his personal
identity and acts as the king even outside the stage, he
will immediately be segregated, and moved to a lunatic
asylum for the safety of the society! He is efficient as the
actor because he constantly remembers his own real
identity. Similarly, even with continuous cognition of our
Divine Nature, we can act in the world without any
hindrance, and thereby add a glow to our achievements,
571
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and soften the reactions of any disappointments that we
might meet with in life's pilgrimage.
A truly educated man never forgets his education; it
becomes part and parcel of his very nature and in every
thought, word and action of his, he brings out the
fragrance of his education. So, too, the man of constant
Awareness will act in the world as a mastermind --- all his
actions soaked in selflessness, all his thoughts flavoured
with love, and all his feelings matured in kindness. This is
the secret with which the Vedic civilisation enchanted the
world of its time and compelled the adoration of all later
generations.
Krishna is here quite clear when He says that, in the case
of an individual who lives a life of battle to win righteous
profits, and constantly remembers the Lord while doing
so, his "MIND AND INTELLECT GET ABSORBED IN
ME." Following the above (VIII-5, 6) theory of "as you
think so you become," "YOU SHALL COME TO ME,"
when once the mental equipment gets absorbed in the
Self, through the process of constant contemplation on the
Self with single-pointed devotion.
FURTHER:
8. With the mind not moving towards any other thing, made
steadfast by the method of habitual meditation, and constantly
572
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
meditating on the Supreme PURUSHA, the Resplendent, O
Partha, he goes (to Him) .
The term 'death'mentioned here does not mean only the
irrevocable physical death, but also the "death of the ego,"
which is to be brought about through the steady practice
of meditation. This stanza is added to the discourse to
show that after the sublimation of the limited ego, one can
live in full Godly Awareness as a liberated God-man, even
here, while living this very life!
One who is practising the above method of living in the
world, "AS A SOJOURNER THEREIN, AND NOT AS A
NATIVE OF IT," and who is training the mind constantly
to rest upon the contemplation of the Self, becomes single-
pointed in his concentration. This, in fact, is a
revolutionary interpretation of the techniques of prayer
and concentration (Upasana) as explained in the Vedas and
also the methods of devotion and surrender championed
in the Puranas, while what is advised in the preceding
stanza is religion lived in the market-place, the everyday-
Samnyasa for the man of action, in the very fields of his
own activities.
By this practice the devotee develops single-pointedness
of the mind which helps to integrate his intellect. With
such well-tuned up and nobly adjusted instruments of
perception and comprehension, and intuitive realisation
of the Divine, the Self becomes an easy experience:
"DWELLING ON THE SUPREME, RESPLENDENT
573
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PURUSHA, O SON OF PRITHA, ONE GOES TO HIM."
With integrated mind, whatever the individual meditates
upon intensively, he must come to gain it soon enough.
Thus, the stanza indicates an ampler significance than
what has been so far declared. This realisation of the Self,
and thereby gaining one's identity with It, can actually
take place in this very same life, if, with prepared mind
and intellect one can, with steadfastness, meditate upon
Me, "THE SUPREME RESPLENDENT PURUSHA.
The term that has been used to indicate the one who
meditates upon the Self (Anuchintayan) is very significant.
Thoughts of the same species, made to run towards one
fixed ideal or goal, in an unbroken flow, are called
"meditations." The prefix 'Anu' in 'Anuchintayan' provides
this significant meaning of the "continuity" of the flow-of-
thought, in one determined channel of contemplation.
WHAT ARE THE SPECIFIC QUALITIES OF THIS GREAT
PURUSHA UPON WHOM WE ARE CONSTANTLY TO
MEDITATE?
9. Whosoever, meditates upon the Omniscient, the Ancient, the
Ruler (of the whole world) , minuter than the atom, the
Supporter of all, of Form inconceivable, Effulgent like the Sun
and beyond the darkness (of ignorance) . . .
By holding the mind constantly in the contemplation of
the Self, the devotee was promised that he could develop
574
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in himself such a powerful and divine trait that at the time
of his departure he can easily come to entertain the
thoughts of the Divine. By a very subtle implication, it was
also suggested in two previous stanzas (VIII-5, 6), that
even while continuing to live in the present embodiment,
the seeker can reach a point where the ego-centric life is
ended. Such a total annihilation of ignorance-created
misconceptions, and the consequent vanities, can be
successfully accomplished by the seekers only when their
minds get totally withdrawn from their attachments to the
false matter-envelopments through the process of
continued contemplation upon the Self.
In the preceding stanza, it was also vaguely hinted that
the contemplation of the Self must be as "THE SUPREME
RESPLENDENT PURUSHA." If I am advised by
somebody to meditate upon or think out the possibilities
of OXYGENELITEEN' it will be impossible for me,
however wise a man I might be, unless I know what that
is. Merely
upon a name, no consistent contemplation is possible.
"OXYGENELITEEN" is merely a word constituted of
letters --- it means nothing; it is only a sound represented
by a few letters of the alphabet. Similarly, to be advised by
a Shastra, to meditate upon the SUPREME
RESPLENDENT SELF, could only be as futile as to be
asked to think over the possibilities of
"OXYGENELITEEN."
575
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In a practical text-book of instruction as to how Vedanta
can be lived, Krishna has to provide Arjuna with sufficient
material indicating the line of contemplation to be
undertaken by the meditator. The two stanzas now under
review, give
an exhaustive design for the students to make themselves
successfully and profitably disciplined.
These qualifying terms are as many different indications
of the Truth (though none defines It), which is the thrilling
core that gives a similitude of life and reality to inert,
unreal matter. No single term here, therefore, is to be
understood as complete in itself. Geometrically, a point
can be defined and indicated only with reference to two
different sets of data. So too, here the inexpressible Reality
has been almost accurately explained with these different
qualifying terms.
Contemplation upon the Reality, through an attempt at
exhaustively comprehending all the secret suggestions in
the above stanza, is to prepare a mental condition in
which, if a mind lives well-integrated and turned inward,
it can come to pause in an atmosphere of Infinite
Experience.
The Conscious Principle, serving as the Soul in an
embodiment, is that which illumines all the thought
waves that rise in that particular mind, functioning in that
given embodiment. The Infinite Self being One
576
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
everywhere, it is the same Principle that illumines all the
different embodiments, all the thought-experiences, at all
times. Just as the Sun is said to be "SEEING
EVERYTHING," because it illuminates all the objects on
the globe, so too, is the Divine Principle of Awareness ---
the factor without which no knowledge is ever possible.
Thus, the Self is considered, in terms of the world of
conditioned-knowledge which we experience today, as
the Supreme Knower who knows everything, Omniscient
(Kavih), and without whom no knowledge is ever possible.
ANCIENT (Puranah) --- The Self is considered as the most
Ancient because the Eternal Truth is that which was
before all creation, which remains the same all through the
ages of existence, and which shall ever remain the same
even after the projections of plurality have ended. To
indicate that the One Self ever remains the same
everywhere, providing a substratum even for the concept
of time, It is indicated here as the Ancient.
THE OVER-RULER (Anushasitah) --- It is not in any way
indicated here that the Self is a Sultan, tyrannically ruling
over the world. Here the term 'Over-ruler' is only to
indicate that if the Principle of Awareness were not
presiding over the multiple faculties of perception, feeling,
and comprehension in us, our physical, mental and
intellectual experiences could not have been harmonised
into the meaningful existence of our life-time.
577
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Overlordship, mentioned here, only indicates that the
Knowing Principle of Consciousness is the very essence
but for which life --- defined as a continuous series of
experiences --- in any form is never possible. Without mud
the mud-pots cannot exist; in all pots the mud is the
OVER-RULER. Just as gold in all gold ornaments, the
ocean in all waves, sweetness in all candy, so too is the
Self in the Universe of names and forms. It is in this sense
that the term 'Overruler' is to be understood. To conceive
of God as a mighty policeman standing with two keys,
one made of gold to open the gates of heaven, and the
other of iron to open the doors of hell, is a barbarous
concept of Godhood that has nothing sacred in it to attract
the intellectually awakened generations!
MINUTER THAN AN ATOM (Anoraniyan) --- The
simplest and the smallest physically divisible particle of
any element which still maintains the specific properties
of that element is called its atom. Thus, it is indicated here
that the Self is the subtlest of the subtle. The subtler a
thing, the greater is its pervasiveness. Water is considered
subtler than a block of ice, and the steam ensuing when
water is boiled is considered subtler than the water itself.
In all these stages, pervasiveness is the measuring rod of
their comparative subtleties. In the Upanishadic lore, it is
usual to consider the Self as "the Subtlest of the Subtle"
which only indicates that "It pervades all, and nothing
pervades It."
578
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE NOURISHER OF ALL (Sarvasya Dhatarah) --- The
nourisher here means the support that sustains
everything. In a cinema theatre, the changeless white-
screen can be considered as the nourisher of the
entertainment, inasmuch as, without it the ever-changing
flow of pictures could not have given us the impression of
a continuous story. However glorious might be the
message that a master-painter has brought out with his
brush, it is the consistent strength of the canvas behind,
that nourishes and sustains the integrity and beauty of the
picture. Similarly, if the One Consciousness were not
constantly illumining the ever-changing flux of things and
happenings around and within us from birth to death,
through all conditions and states of our existence, the
homogeneous oneness of life would never have been ours
to react to and feel fulfilled with.
OF FORM INCONCEIVABLE (Achintya-roopah) --- If there
be a factor that is Omniscient, Ancient, Over-ruler,
Subtlest of the subtle, and Nourisher of all, and if we are
advised to meditate upon It, then it is possible that we
immediately get a false notion that the Self can be thought
of and comprehended, as any other finite object or idea,
by our limited faculties of the head or the heart. To
remove this wrong idea and to emphasize that the Infinite
cannot be comprehended by the finite instruments of
perception, feeling and understanding --- but can only be
apprehended when these equipments are transcended ---
the Lord is particularly anxious to tell His students that
the Self is of "THE FORM INCONCEIVABLE." Though it
579
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is thus, in fact, inconceivable, yet, on transcending the
equipment of experiences, the individual, in a process of
Divine Awakening, can subjectively apprehend It to be his
own Essential Nature.
LUMINOUS LIKE THE SUN (Aditya-varnah) --- If the
implication of the above term (Achintya-roopah) be true, no
intelligent seeker can arrest his temptation to doubt as to
how the Self can ever be realised. As seekers, we live and
strive within the limitations of our own mind and
intellect. Every moment of our existence, we gather a
harvest of experiences only through the use of the
different equipments given to us. Living as we are, rooted
in our false identifications with these equipments in the
early days of our spiritual efforts, the seeker in us should
necessarily despair at the impossible conception and the
mad mission of "knowing the UN-KNOWABLE" ---
conceiving the IN-CONCEIVABLE --- understanding the
UN-UNDERSTANDABLE --- or experiencing the IN
EXPERIENCABLE!!!
The Self is defined as the UN-UNDERSTANDABLE, or
the IN-CONCEIVABLE, or IN-EXPERIENCABLE, etc.,
only to indicate that the instruments of cognition,
experience and apprehension are not available for
functioning in the Self. The dream-gun, with which the
dreamer had shot the enemies of his dream-world, cannot
be any longer handled by him, when once he has
awakened. Even the bloody hands of a dreamer, after a
dream-murder, become automatically clean, without
580
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
either soap or water, the moment he wakes up! As long as
man is identifying with his limiting adjuncts, he lives in
the external world of his self-projected delusory
multiplicity, wherein the Self is "IN-CONCEIVABLE, and
IN-EXPERIENCABLE." But the moment these adjuncts are
transcended through a process of steadfast contemplation
on the Self, he gets awakened to his own nature of Pure
Being.
Once having understood this much of the fundamental
concepts of Vedanta, it becomes easy to appreciate the
matchless beauty of the example of the Sun. In order to see
the Sun, no other light is necessary, as the Sun is the
"SOURCE" of all light, the one illuminator that illuminates
everything else. Just as, in the physical world, the Sun, in
its self-effulgence, is self-evident, so too, in the spiritual
realm, to know the Knowledge Absolute, no other
knowing-principle is needed. The dreamer can never
KNOW the waker, for, while knowing the waking-state
the dreamer himself ends to BECOME the waker; to
awaken oneself from the dream is to know the waker; to
KNOW the waker is to BECOME the waker. So too, on
ending the ego-centric existence, in the flash of the
spiritual awakening, the misguided, panting ego ends
itself in the re-discovery that it has been nothing but the
Self, at all times. This vast suggestion is cramped into a
mystic word-picture: "LUMINOUS LIKE THE SUN."
BEYOND ALL DARKNESS (Tamasah-Parastat) --- The
limited and the finite example of the Sun calls into the
581
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
heart of a student some dangerous misgivings. The Sun in
the heavens is, no doubt, resplendent, but only during the
day; and even during the day-time there are various
degrees of intensity of the sunlight experienced by the
living kingdom. If the Self is "LUMINOUS LIKE THE
SUN," then the industrious student may gather that the
Self also varies in Its intensity, and that there are periods
of time when It is not at all available! To remove these two
fallacious ideas --- that the Self is variable in nature and
sometimes totally absent, this qualifying term is used
here. The very limitation of the Sun, meaning the darkness
of the night, is negated when Krishna says that the Self is
"BEYOND THE DARKNESS" of ignorance, or Maya.
He who meditates upon the Self thus, as Omniscient,
Ancient, Overruler, Subtlest of the subtle, Nourisher of all,
of Inconceivable Form, Self-illuminating as the Sun, and
Beyond all traces of ignorance, is the one who "goes to
Him."
10. At the time of death, with an unshaken mind full of
devotion, by the power of 'YOGA' fixing the whole 'PRANA'
(breath) between the two eyebrows, he (the seeker) reaches the
Supreme Resplendent 'PURUSHA. '
Following the word-meaning only, this stanza has been
indeed, very often, sadly mis-understood and badly
interpreted.
582
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This section in the Geeta is describing single-pointed
meditation upon the Highest. Therefore the expression AT
THE TIME OF DEATH is to be understood as "AT THE
MOMENT OF THE DEATH OF THE EGO." When all
identifications with the body-mind-intellect are
consciously withdrawn through the process of meditation,
at the HALT-MOMENT of perfect inner silence and
tranquillity, "WITH THE MIND UNMOVING," the
meditator can follow the instructions contained in this
stanza.
The term "Bhakti" is not to be understood in its cheap
connotation, which it has come to gather in its direct
translation as 'devotion.' Self-less love, seeking a
fulfilment in itself, when directed towards the divine with
firm faith and an all-out belief, is called Bhakti. Love itself
means identifying with the object of love in such a way
that the joys and sorrows of the beloved become equally
poignant joys and sorrows of the lover. In short, the lovers
become one with their beloveds, both in their physical and
emotional lives. Therefore, Shankara describes Bhakti as
"the identification of the ego with its Real Nature."
In the context of the stanza here, the important suggestion
given to the meditator is that his meditation should be
accompanied by a readiness to identify himself intensely
with the Principle of Awareness, which has been
exhaustively indicated in the previous stanza. He must
come to live the Self, within himself, at that still moment
583
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of Inward Silence, which rings the death-knell of the
deluded-ego.
BY THE POWER OF YOGA (Yoga-balena) --- Here we are
not talking of some secret and mysterious strength --- the
Serpent Power --- which is the highly guarded secret of a
rare few, which should not be spilt to everyone even
among those who profess to be the devotees of the Lord.
The strength acquired by a meditator, when he meditates
upon the Supreme regularly for a long period of time, is
the strength --- the "POWER OF YOGA" --- that is
indicated here. This is nothing other than the inward
strength, the inward fire, that grows when the mind is
withdrawn from its endless agitations and the intellect is
peacefully rested in its contemplations upon the infinite
qualities of the Absolute.
The meditator, in a relatively short time, discovers in
himself a wealth of mental equipoise and an indescribable
efficiency, ready to bring his entire mental equipment into
the contemplation of the Self in him. When an individual
is thus engaged in meditation, all his pranas are
concentrated at the point of his meditation --- maybe
"between the eye-brows," as it represents the frontal-brain,
the seat of steady thought.
Prana is the term used in the Science of Vedanta to indicate
"all the different expressions of life's vitality, through the
various instruments and organs of the body." Life
expressing itself as the various functions in a living
584
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
physical body is called the Prana, which, according to its
varied manifestations is classified under five main
headings as: Prana: the faculty of sense perception; Apana:
the excretory system; Vyana: the digestive system; Samana:
the circulatory system; and Udana: the capacity in us to see
beyond our present world of knowledge into the field of
some greater concept and live it. All these different
activities are channels of dissipation through which the
vital attention in us is getting exhausted. When an
individual gets lost in the Silence within at the moment of
his merger with the Self, all these faculties are temporarily
arrested. For a seeker walking the Path of Meditation no
other violent physical practices at all are needed.
Such an individual --- in whom, during the deepest
moments of concentration, the mind becomes perfectly
silent and tranquil; in whom, through the strength of his
steadfast meditation, all manifestations of life's presence
through his physical body become controlled and arrested
and when he, in his enthusiasm, totally identifies with the
point of his contemplation, the Self --- "HE GOES TO
THAT SUPREME RESPLENDENT SELF (PURUSHA)."
AS AN INTRODUCTION TO THE MEDITATION UPON
OM, THE FOLLOWING IS GIVEN:
11. That which is declared Imperishable by the VEDA -knowers;
That into which, the self-controlled and desire-freed enter; That
585
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
desiring which BRAHMCHARYA is practised --- That Goal I
will declare to thee in brief.
This stanza, which is reminiscent of a famous Upanishadic
declaration, while glorifying the goal, is promising that
Krishna will, in the following verses, explain the Supreme
destination of Perfection and the means of achieving it.
Worship (Upasana) of the syllable OM is frequently
advised in almost all the Upanishads as a sure method of
making the final adjustments in the mind-intellect-
equipment of the meditator, so that complete success in
meditation may be assured to him. From the Pauranic era
onwards, meditation with faith and devotion, regularly,
upon any of the recognised incarnations, has also been
found to serve the same purpose with the same efficiency.
Here, very many necessary precautions and warnings are
given to the seeker, so that his spiritual pilgrimage may be
comparatively easy and pleasant. The obstacles about
which meditators generally complain arise from their own
lack of self-withdrawal from the finite matter-
envelopments. It is necessary that, as a Science of Self
Perfection, Vedanta should not only give the techniques of
meditation, but also indicate for the seekers the possible
pit-falls on the path and equip them, sufficiently early,
with all instructions as to how they can get out, in case
they fall into any of these jamming ruts. This verse
indicates how one can be assured of an easy path while
moving ahead on the track of meditation --- carefully
586
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
avoiding all extrovert desires that cater to one's sensuous
appetites, and by practising severe and consistent self-
control.
In the opening of this chapter, (stanza-3) the Supreme was
defined as the Imperishable. Quoting Himself, Krishna
emphasises here that the very same Imperishable Truth
can be realised --- they come to "enter into the
Imperishable" --- when they, the men of self-control, who
are unagitated by desires, withdraw successfully from the
changeable and the perishable in themselves.
FREED FROM ATTACHMENT (Veeta-ragah) --- The entire
Geeta is a Song of renunciation; not a dull-witted and un-
creative renunciation, but a healthy detachment through
right knowledge, which is the harbinger of all progress
and development everywhere. The renunciation of desires
is not a psychological suppression of the existing
appetites, but that which takes place as a result of a
natural blossoming of the intellect. The newly opened
buds, after a time, renounce their soft, beautiful skirts and
stand naked, expressing a renunciation of the gorgeous;
but in nature, this happens only when the flowers are
pollinated and the fruits are well in the making. The
shedding of the petals may be a sacrifice or renunciation
from the standpoint of a casual flower-gazer, but to the
farmer who knows, it is a sacrifice or renunciation of the
flowers in their newly gained maturity that has
automatically made the beautiful petals fall off.
587
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, in the Spiritual Science of India, no doubt, there
is an emphasis on the necessity of renunciation, but it is
not a sad and melancholy self-denial or self-punishment,
which some other religions do preach and practise. A
renunciation that has sprung up from the fertile lands of
efficient discrimination is that which is insisted upon by
the intellectual giants of the Upanishads. The term "ONE
FREED FROM ATTACHMENT" is therefore, to be
understood as one who has grown out of his passionate
attachments to the finite, that constitute the insignificant
parade of the world, in his more mature and steady
understanding of the nature and the goal of his life.
Also, it is true that the more the number of desires
entertained, the greater is the mental tossing, and the
consequent agitation. The greater the disturbance in the
mind, the lesser is the mental potentiality expressed. A
meditator's success depends upon his mental dynamism,
and the only wealth that can ease the rigours of the
journey is his own mental equipoise and inward peace.
Therefore, as a policy, it is advised that men of least desire
have the maximum chance for the greatest success in the
Path of Knowledge.
IN ORDER TO INDICATE WHAT THE EARLY STAGES
OF 'UPASANA' AND THEIR RESULTS ARE, THE
FOLLOWING IS ADDED:
588
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
12. Having closed all the gates, having confined the mind in the
heart, having fixed the life-breath in the "head, " engaged in the
practice of concentration,
13. Uttering the one-syllabled 'OM' --- the (symbol of)
BRAHMAN --- and remembering Me, he who departs, leaving
the body, attains the Supreme Goal.
The practice of concentration can most effectively be
undertaken and efficiently continued only when three
necessary conditions are fulfilled by the meditator. These
are narrated here in the verses in the sequence they have
to be practised.
CONTROLLING ALL THE SENSES --- Each sense-organ
is an aperture in the physical body. The porous skin, the
ear, the nose, the eyes, and the taste-buds are the five main
gates through which the external stimuli reach the mental
zone to agitate it. To shut these five doors through
discrimination and detachment is the first process, before
the meditator can ever hope to enter the field of
meditation. These are the five inlets through which not
only the external world storms in and agitates the mind,
but our mind also runs out to wander among its sensuous
ditches. When once these tunnels-of-disturbance are
blockaded, the new flow of disturbances is shut out.
CONFINING THE MIND IN THE HEART --- Even
though the mind is not now directly open for any
onslaught by fresh contingents of sense stimuli, it is
589
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
capable of getting disturbed due to the previous
impressions that it might have gathered in its past
experiences in the finite world of change and pleasure.
Therefore the mind, the instrument of emotion and
feeling, it is advised, is to be confined in the 'heart.'
The term 'heart'in Vedanta is not the pumping-organ that
maintains the circulatory system in a physical structure. In
the field of literature and philosophy, heart is a conceptual
centre in the mind from where all positive and noble
thoughts of love and tenderness, kindness and charity,
devotion and surrender, constantly spring up. When once
the gross stimuli are held back from entering the mind,
the seeker is advised not to choke his faculty of emotion
and feeling but to DIVINISE IT. Let the mind function
only in the dignity and status of the heart. It has already
been discussed how positive thinking brings into the mind
the least amount of disturbance. Negative thoughts are
those that bring into the mind stormy conditions of
agitation and restlessness.
WITHDRAWING ALL THE PRANAS, "THE VITAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF LIFE THROUGH THE
DIFFERENT EQUIPMENTS," INTO THE INTELLECT
means the total withdrawal of the intellect from all its
identifications with the lower, gained by dissociating
ourselves from all our perceptions, etc. This is
accomplished through a process of totally engaging the
mind-intellect in the contemplation of the Self. When the
meditator's mind, drawn away from the sense-
590
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
disturbances, is purified in the realm of the diviner
thoughts, and when such a mind is perfectly controlled
and held steady by an intellect gushing out towards the
contemplation of the Self, as explained earlier, (Ibid.-9, 10)
the existing mental condition is said to be "occupied in the
practice of concentration" (Yoga-dharanam).
Every meditator who can make an attempt at forgetting
his immediate sensual surroundings, and, surcharged
with joy and contentment, can bring his mind under the
total control of his discriminative intellect, can mentally
chant OM with ease and enthusiasm, and observe the
rising OM-waves in this otherwise silenced mind... is the
student fit for the worship of OM. The following line in its
amplitude of significance clearly brings out the same
view-point.
HE WHO DEPARTS, LEAVING THE BODY --- While
chanting and contemplating upon the significance of OM,
the seeker becomes so detached from all his delusory
identifications with the false matter-envelopments that the
ego is sublimated; this is the true death "LEAVING THE
BODY." In his single-pointed, all-out, self-forgetting
contemplation upon the significance of OM --- as the
Substratum on which is played the drama of life and
death, projected by the mischievous mind --- the seeker, in
Krishna's own words, "ATTAINS THE SUPREME GOAL."
591
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IS SELF RE-DISCOVERY SO DIFFICULT EQUALLY FOR
ALL PEOPLE WHO ARE WALKING THE PATH OF
MEDITATION?
14. I am easily attainable by that ever-steadfast YOGI who
constantly remembers Me daily, not thinking of anything else,
O Partha.
To the one who is ever-steadfast in the Life Divine and
"REMEMBERS ME," THE SELF, ALWAYS AND DAILY,
with a mind unshattered, to him the Self is easily
attainable. The statements in the previous stanzas are all
again summarised here in a more emphatic and direct
language.
PRAYER IS NO INSECTICIDE TO BE SPRAYED NOW
AND THEN; NOR SHOULD THE DIVINE ALTAR BE
CONSIDERED AS A BATH-ROOM, WHERE ONE
ENTERS DIRTY AND WALKS OUT CLEAN! Here
Krishna is very careful to insist, with all the strength and
emphasis that He can command, that the Divine
Consciousness must be maintained by the seeker
constantly and continuously "ALL THROUGH THE DAY,
DAILY."
To such an individual, "I AM EASILY ATTAINABLE, O
ARJUNA." This positive assertion has a very important
significance inasmuch as it indicates that the negation of
592
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
these conditions will not be conducive even to hope for
success in meditation.
WHY SHOULD ONE STRUGGLE SO HARD TO
REALISE THE SELF? LISTEN:
15. Having attained Me, these MAHATMAS (great souls) do
not again take birth, which is the house of pain and is non-
eternal, they having reached the Highest Perfection ,
MOKSHA.
Estimating the benefit enjoyed by a Man-of-Perfection,
through the realisation of the Self, it is said that "HAVING
ATTAINED ME, THE HIGH-SOULED ONES ARE NO
MORE SUBJECT TO RE-BIRTH." To the philosophically
thoughtful, rebirth is the starting point of all pains and
imperfections. Krishna also says in the verse that rebirth
is a "HOUSE OF PAIN AND IS EPHEMERAL."
In the history of thought in the Upanishads, it is quite
interesting to note how the goal of life, which was
considered in the beginning as "the state of deathlessness"
(Amritattwa), came to the reckoned, later on, as the "the
absence of rebirth" (Na-punar-janma). In the beginning, the
anxiety of the seeker was to end the unavoidable and the
most horrid of all experiences called 'death.' As
knowledge increased through the right evaluation of the
happenings in life, it soon became clear to the subjective
593
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
research-scholars, the Rishis, that death had really no sting
at all for those who had understood that it is nothing but
one of the different experiences in life. Death can in no
way clip off the continuity of existence. Those relentless
thinkers had, in the logic of their thoughts, come to the
conclusion that birth was the beginning of all pains, and
therefore, the goal of life, if at all it was possible to
achieve, should be "THE STATE OF NO MORE
REBIRTH."
The dream of rebirth and its destinies belongs to the
delusory ego, which is nothing but the Unborn Self
identifying with its delusory matter-envelopments.
Electricity conditioned by the bulb is the light; when the
bulb gets broken, the light which is an effect merges with
its cause, the current, one-without-a-second, everywhere
the same, illumining all the bulbs in the world. Similarly,
the Self conditioned by a given mind and intellect is the
ego (Jeeva), which suffers the rebirth, the agonies of
imperfections, the disease, the decay and the death. The
ego comes to rediscover that it is nothing other than the
Self, once the mind-intellect equipment has been stilled.
He who thus experiences the Self as his own Real Nature
realises that he has never any relationship at all with the
equipments of feeling and understanding. Just as an
awakened man has no more relationship with his own
dream-wife and children, the ego ends its march through
the thorny path of pain and finitude, when it awakens to
the spiritual cognition of the Self. Such great souls will no
594
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
more have any need to manifest in the plane of plurality
to be presented with the repeated lashes of sorrow and
misery.
He who has, through the process of "CONSTANT
CONTEMPLATION OF THE SELF" (VIII-14) during his
lifetime, learnt to control all the senses, to regulate the
mind and the heart, to control and to arrest all pranas in
the intellect --- he directly comes to identify himself with
the Infinite and the Eternal, and shall no more come back
into a limited embodiment to continue his futile search for
infinite satisfaction among the finite world-of-objects.
BUT ARE THERE ANY WHO COME BACK NOT
REACHING THE HIGHEST? LISTEN:
16. Worlds upto the "world-of -BRAHMAJI" are subject to
rebirth, O Arjuna; but he who reaches Me, O Kaunteya, has no
birth.
It is a characteristic technique, often employed by the
Teacher in the Geeta, to bring home his ideas, by
expressing them, for purposes of emphasis, against the
background of their opposites. Thus, we find here in the
verse two contradictory factors put in opposition to each
other so that, each, as a contrast to the other, may shine
out the best in the mental horizon of the students. "UP TO
THE REALM OF BRAHMAJI ALL ARE SUBJECT TO
REBIRTH." This idea is contrasted with the result of
595
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
realising directly and totally the Self, the Eternal: "BUT,
AFTER ATTAINING ME THERE IS NO REBIRTH."
The theory of gradual liberation (Krama Mukti), accepted
in Vedanta, says that ritualism (Karma), accompanied by
meditation (Upasana), takes the ego to the realm-of-the-
Creator (Brahma-loka) where, at the end of the Kalpa (the
cycle of creation and dissolution), it merges with the
Supreme. Even in Brahma-loka it is necessary that the ego
must, through self-effort, live strictly all the spiritual
directions of the Creator, and through constant
contemplation upon the Self (Atma-Vichara) come to
deserve the total liberation, by ending all its connections
with "ignorance." Those who have not reached the realm-
of-the-Creator, may not come to enjoy the Supreme-
merger. They will, at the end of the Kalpa, have to come
back and take their manifestation in embodiments,
ordered by their remaining vasanas. This principle is kept
in mind when Krishna says that rebirth is for everyone,
even to those who have attained any high plane up to
Brahma-loka; having once reached Brahma-loka, there is no
return, but from there the meditator rises to merge in the
Self.
But to those who have awakened to the rediscovery of
their essential, Eternal Nature and realised themselves to
be the One, All-pervading Self --- "AFTER ATTAINING
ME" --- to them, thereafter, there is no return to the plane
of limited-existence. To the waker there is no re-admission
into the realm where he was when he was dreaming; to
596
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
awake is to miss for ever the joys and sorrows of that
dream which he had dreamt. After attaining the waker-
hood (Me) there is no return (rebirth) into the dreamland
(Samsara).
17. Those people who know (the length of) the day- of-
BRAHMA which ends in a thousand YUGAS (aeons) , and the
night which (also) ends in a thousand YUGAS (aeons) , they
know day-and-night.
Einstein's 'Theory of Relativity' has pricked the bubble
and it has been accepted even in the West that the
concepts of time and space depend upon individual
factors governing their measurements. Time hangs
heavily and moves at a snail's pace when one is in
agitation, as when one is anxiously waiting for something;
while, to the same individual, time flies when he is quite
at ease with himself, under circumstances happy,
pleasant, and entertaining. One playing cards knows not
when the night was spent and he is surprised when he
notices the early dawn peeping through the windows. The
same person will complain that each moment has
lengthened itself to become hours, when he is at some
unpleasant work, or is suffering some pain. He who is
enjoying the homogeneous experience of sleep, has no
concept of time at all while he is sleeping.
From the above, it has been logically concluded in the
philosophy of the Hindus, that time is truly the measure
597
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the interval between two different experiences. The
greater the number of experiences that flood the mind to
agitate it, the slower will the time move; while the longer
the same experience continues, the faster moves the time.
In a single given experience there is no perception of time
just as there is no concept of distance when there is only
one point; distances can be measured only between two or
more points. Basing their calculations upon this theory,
the Pauranic-poets rightly conceived that their gods had a
larger dial for their divine clocks! In the Upanishads also,
we find a scale of relative intensity of Bliss-experience,
from a mortal, healthy, young man, living in conducive
environments, upto the very Creator Himself. This
ascending scale of joy, experienced in different realms of
Consciousness, is showing the relative mental equipoise
and tranquillity at those different levels of existence.
It is said here that a thousand "cycles" constitute the day-
time of the Creator; and an equally long thousand "cycles"
constitute the night-time of the Creator. This declaration
of those, "WHO KNOW THE TRUE MEASURE OF THE
DAY AND THE NIGHT," calculated in terms of "cycles"
has been translated in terms of our 365-day years. Each
"cycle" consists of aeons (Yugas). Four aeons (Yugas)
together constitute one "cycle," and a thousand "cycles"
are conceived of as constituting the daytime of the
Creator!
As the individual units, so is the sum total of the
assembly. The individual mind projects, creates and
598
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sustains what its fancies dictate, and without any regret
scraps the whole lot, only to create afresh. This constant
function does take place in each individual only during
the day time, as representing the waking state. In the same
fashion the Total Mind --- the Cosmic Creator --- also is
conceived as creating the gross world of dense objects and
intelligent beings only during His waking hours.
18. From the unmanifested all the manifested proceed at the
coming of the "day" ; at the coming of "night" they dissolve
verily in that alone which is called the unmanifest.
19. This same multiple of beings are being born again and again,
and are dissolved (into the unmanifest) ; helplessly, O Partha, at
the coming of "night, " and they come forth again at the coming
of "day. "
In these two stanzas an explanation is given on how the
Creator employs Himself, during his day, which is a
thousand aeons long, and during his night, which also is
an equally long interval. It is also added here, that the
Creator creates during the day, and the entire created
world, at the approach of His night, merges into 'the
unmanifest' (Avyakta).
In the worldly sense of the term, 'creation'is generally
understood as the production of something new.
Philosophically viewed, 'creation'has a subtler significance
and a more intimate meaning. A pot-maker can 'create'
599
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
pots out of mud, but he cannot 'create' Laddus (a popular
Indian sweetmeat) out of the same mud! The act of
'creation'is only the production of a name and form, with
some specific qualities, out of a raw-material in which the
same name, form, and qualities are already existing in an
unmanifest condition. The 'POT-NESS' was in the mud,
while the 'Laddu-ness' is not therein, and therefore, a pot
can be 'created' from a given sample of mud, not so even a
tiny bit of Laddu. Hence, it is concluded by the thinkers of
Vedanta that "CREATION IS BUT A CRYSTALLISATION
OF THE UNMANIFEST DORMANT NAMES, FORMS,
AND QUALITIES, INTO THEIR MANIFEST FORMS OF
EXISTENCE."
Anyone, living as he does on any given day, is but the
product of the numerous yesterdays that he has lived in
his intellectual thoughts, his emotional feelings and his
physical actions. The actions of the past, supported by the
thoughts entertained and the valuations accepted by him,
leave a distinct flavour upon his mind and intellect, and
the future thoughts and their flow are controlled and
directed by the previously made thought-channels.
Just as there is consistency of species in procreation, so
also, there is a consistency noticeable in the multiplication
of thoughts. Just as frogs breed frogs, and men breed men,
or mango seeds germinate and grow to put forth
mangoes, so too, good thoughts creating good thought-
currents can multiply only into a flood of good thoughts.
These thought-impressions in the mind (vasanas), that lie
600
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
unmanifest to our sense-organs and often to our own
mental and intellectual perceptions, become manifested as
gross actions, thoughts and words, making our path of life
either smooth or rough, according to the texture and
quality of the thoughts manifested.
Suppose a doctor, an advocate, a devotee and dacoit are
all sleeping in a rest-house. While sleeping, all of them
look the same --- masses of flesh and bones, warm and
breathing. The advocate is in no way different from the
dacoit, nor is the doctor different from the devotee. The
specific qualities in each bosom, at this moment, though
totally absent from observation are not non-existent but
they remain in a condition of dormancy.
These unmanifested temperaments, capacities,
inclinations and tendencies come to project forth and
manifest when they wake up, and once they leave the rest-
house, each will be pursuing his own particular thought-
tendencies. In the rest-house, the doctor, the advocate, the
devotee and the dacoit, were all in their "unmanifest-state"
(Pralaya) while they were asleep; but at dawn, when they
wake up, these four different specimens are projected
forth into manifestation. This, in the language of religion
and philosophy, is called "creation."
With this correct understanding of the process of
"creation," it would be certainly easy for us to understand
the cosmic processes of "creation and dissolution." The
Creator, or the Total-mind, during His waking hours of
601
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
thousand aeons, projects out the already existing vasanas,
and "AT THE APPROACH OF NIGHT, THEY MERGE
VERILY INTO THAT ALONE, WHICH IS CALLED THE
'UNMANIFEST'."
It is insisted here by Lord Krishna, that "THE VERY SAME
MULTITUDE OF BEINGS ARE BORN AGAIN AND
AGAIN, AND MERGE IN SPITE OF THEMSELVES."
Subjectively, this declaration provides us with a clearer
understanding of how man becomes enslaved by his own
thoughts and emotions. It is never possible that an animal-
man, pursuing consistently the life of sensuality,
perpetrating unkind cruelties in order to satisfy his
passions can wake up overnight, to be a gracious man of
all perfections --- however great his teacher, however
divine the occasion, and whatever the sanctity of the place
or the time may be.
No teacher can, or shall ever, teach his disciple and
thereby transform him, instantaneously, into a divine
person, unless, of course, the student has the divine
tendencies lying dormant and ready for manifestation in
him! The moment anybody argues that, as a rare instance,
one great soul had been so transformed in the past, by one
unique teacher, then there must have been some equally
unique instance of some magician producing a Laddu out
of mud! In the latter case, we know that it was only magic
and that the Laddu was NOT produced from the mud.
Similarly, intelligent people, with some understanding of
the Science of Life, and with at least a little share of respect
602
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
for and devotion to the Prophet of the Geeta, will hoot
down such a fantastic story. Such a story can be accepted
only in a mood of poetic exaggeration indulged in by the
disciples, in praise of their teacher.
THE VERY SAME MULTITUDE OF BEINGS, meaning the
very same bundles of thought-impressions --- an
individual being nothing other than the thoughts that he
entertains --- arrive at different fields of activity and states
of Consciousness in order to exhaust themselves. "IN
SPITE OF THEMSELVES" (Avassah), is a powerful
expression indicating the incapacity of an individual to
disinherit himself from his past. The past always faithfully
follows us like our shadow --- darkening our path when
we turn our back to the Light of Knowledge, and
accompanying us submissively at our heels like a
guardian angel when we turn towards the effulgent Self
and wend our way towards It.
On leaving a physical embodiment, a particular mind-
intellect-equipment continues its existence in just the same
way as an actor who drops down the apparel of the king
at the close of the play and continues to exist in his
individual capacity as the father of his children, the
husband of his wife, etc. The taking up of a physical
structure and singing the song of one's mental vasanas, in
the form of actions, is called 'creation,' and when that
physical structure is given up, the thoughts and ideas,
having no equipment to express themselves, become the
unmanifest. A violinist playing on his violin makes the
603
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
music in him manifest; and, when the violin is kept away
in its box, the music in the individual becomes
unmanifest.
This 'realm of the unmanifest' in each bosom undergoes
constant change, whenever it comes in contact with the
world of manifestation and reacts to it. We already know
that change cannot take place unless it is upon a
changeless substratum.
UPON WHAT PERMANENT PLATFORM DOES THE
UNMANIFEST COME TO PLAY ITS DRAMA OF LIFE?
20. But verily there exists, higher than that unmanifest
(AVYAKTA) , another Unmanifested, which is Eternal, which
is not destroyed when all beings are destroyed.
The same black-board is approached by different teachers
to explain different subjects, during a single day in a class
room. The mathematics teacher's geometrical figures and
calculations are wiped clean by the geography teacher to
design his maps of the world and to trace the path of
rivers, the location of lakes and the position of mountains.
When the chemistry teacher arrives, he erases the entire
world of mountains, rivers and oceans represented on the
black-board, and he, in his turn, writes on it the laws of
chemical reactions among the various elements and their
compounds. The history teacher makes the black-board
clean again, to scribble on it the ancestral trees of
604
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dynasties destroyed and families forgotten. Each teacher
comes and writes on the black-board different words and
symbols which represent the design of knowledge that he
has in his bosom. But all designs were chalked out and
executed upon the same black-board, which illumined the
mathematical calculations, the geographical data, the
chemical formulae, and the historical facts, in turn.
Similarly, the changing world of the unmanifest must
have one Changeless Substratum, "THAT WHICH IS NOT
DESTROYED BY THE DESTRUCTION OF ALL BEINGS
(bhutas)." When, in the evening, the students and teachers
have all left the class room, the black-board still remains.
The principle of Pure Consciousness, Itself Unmanifest ---
inasmuch as It is not perceivable by the sense organs or
comprehensible by the mind and intellect --- is indicated
here as the changeless substratum of all, when the Lord
declares, "BEYOND THIS UNMANIFEST, THERE IS THE
OTHER ETERNAL EXISTENCE, THE UNMANIFESTED."
The unmanifest (vasanas) are the seeds of the manifest and
they constitute, what Vedanta indicates by its very familiar
term, "Ignorance" (Avidya). "Ignorance" can be only of an
existent something; I cannot be ignorant of my tail, since I
do not have a tail. This proves the existence of some
Positive Factor called the Truth, the Self --- the black-
board upon which all other conditional knowledges are
scribbled --- serving as the Permanent and Changeless
Substratum. "The ignorance of the Real Nature of this
Eternal Factor," is called Avidya, which, in its turn projects
605
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the manifested ever-changing world of names and forms.
The Ultimate Reality, the Self, is being indicated here as
something that lies beyond the hazy frontiers of the
delusory experiences of creation, dissolution, and re-
creation, over and over again.
IS THIS UNMANIFEST THEN THE SUPREME? OR, IS
THERE YET ANOTHER FACTOR WHICH ALONE IS FIT
TO BE THE GOAL OF LIFE?
21. That which is called the Unmanifest and the Imperishable,
that, they say is the Highest Goal (path) . They who reach It
never again return. That is My highest abode (state) .
What has been indicated in the previous stanza as "THE
OTHER UNMANIFEST --- WHICH IS THE ETERNAL
EXISTENCE --- WHICH KNOWS NO DESTRUCTION," is
explained here as the Imperishable mentioned earlier in
this chapter. The Imperishable was defined as the
Brahman, the substratum for the entire universe, and we
were
also advised that we must meditate upon OM as the
symbol of this Imperishable. The Self which is of the
nature of Pure Awareness is that which lends existence
and dynamism to the unmanifested vasanas, and makes
them capable of projecting out to form the manifested
world of activities and behaviours. This Eternal
606
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Unmanifested Factor, the Imperishable Self, is the highest
goal for man to achieve.
In all other states of existence, there is again and again the
experience of return. Just as sleep is not the end of life, but
only a refreshing pause between two spans of activity, so
too death is not an end, but often, only a restful pause in
the unmanifested condition, that comes between two
successive manifested existences in different
embodiments. It was already indicated that even from
higher levels of Consciousness, the ego-centres will have
to return to exhaust their unmanifested cravings, the
vasanas. Birth, we have already been told, is "A HOUSE
OF PAIN AND FINITUDE," and therefore, complete
satisfaction can be reached only when there is no rebirth --
- no return.
Often, educated students of the present generation ask:
"Why, after realising the Self, should there be no-return?"
The question, though natural, cannot stand even a
moment's scrutiny. Generally, cause-hunting is for things
that happen and not for things that do not happen!
Nobody anxiously enquires why I am not in a hospital but
an intelligent enquirer has every right to enquire why I
have gone to the hospital. We may enquire why the
Infinite has become the finite; but the question does not
arise at all why the Infinite should not fall again into the
finite. This question is as absurd as my enquiring as to
why you are not yet in jail. For not going to jail, no cause-
hunting is necessary. And if you have actually gone to jail,
607
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
there is certainly a justification to ask and enquire what is
the exact crime for which you have been sent to jail.
We can never explain to a little girl and make that child
understand what are the physical and emotional thrills of
married life; in her childhood she has not the vehicle for
comprehending the biological thrills of sex-life. But, as the
same girl grows in her maturity, she develops in herself
the biological antennae to feel and mentally comprehend
the very same thrills which were to her but empty
suggestions in early childhood --- when all she wanted
was that her mother should marry her! In the same
fashion, a seeker who lies burrowed in the dung-heap of
his mind and intellect, cannot, in its filthy atmosphere,
know the vast embrace of the horizon and the glorious
fragrance of the fresh breeze. As he detaches himself from
his false identifications, through the process of meditation
advised, (VIII-12, 13 and 14) he, as it were, hatches out of
his limiting adjuncts, and enters the vaster fields of subtler
experiences. On waking up alone can one realise the
falsehood of one's dreams; the dreamer can never, so long
as he dreams, realise the delusion from which he is
suffering. Having awakened from a dream, the waker
cannot be persecuted by his dream sorrows and his
dream-happenings.
The Self, or Pure Consciousness, is poetically described
here by Vyasa as the dwelling place of Krishna, "THAT IS
MY HIGHEST DWELLING-PLACE." In the Geeta, the
Singer of the Song Divine, is THE Self, and as such the
608
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Highest Goal is to reach the State of Pure Consciousness,
the Imperishable, which is available for the experiencer of
the Self. This was described at length while the teacher
was indicating the nature of Knowledge gained by one
who attains the State of the Divine Purusha.
THE DIRECT PATH BY WHICH THIS CONSUMMATE
GOAL CAN BE REACHED IS EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
22. That Highest 'PURUSHA' , O Partha, is attainable by
unswerving devotion to Him alone, within whom all beings
dwell, by whom all this is pervaded.
Here Krishna, the Prophet of the Hindus, vividly chalks
out the technique and the path by which "WHAT HAS
BEEN CALLED THE UNMANIFEST, THE
IMPERISHABLE --- THAT SUPREME PURUSHA IS
ATTAINABLE." Single-pointed devotion is the way and
the means. Devotion --- total selfless identification --- with
the Supreme Purusha can be achieved only when the
devotee has learnt to dissociate himself from all his
preoccupations with his world of body, mind, and
intellect. This detachment from the false is gained in a
growing attachment with the Real, the Permanent. An act
of inspired seeking, of identifying oneself totally with the
experience of 'SELF I AM' is the "WHOLE-SOULED
DEVOTION TO HIM ALONE,' that is mentioned in this
verse.
609
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Self, thus identified by the seeker in his meditation as
himself, should not be conceived of as merely the Divine
Spark that presides over his own individual matter-
envelopments. Though the seeking is subjective, in
identifying with the Self, in the final experience, It is to be
realised as the very Substratum of the entire universe.
Implying this oneness of the Self with the Truth behind
the entire world of phenomena, Bhagawan says, as an
indication of the nature of the Purusha, "IN WHOM ALL
BEINGS ABIDE AND BY WHOM ALL THIS IS
PERVADED."
All mud-pots exist in the mud, and the mud pervades all
mud-pots irrespective of their shape, size, or colour.
Whether it be a breaker, or a wave, or a wavelet, all are
nothing but the ocean, and the ocean pervades all of them.
Within and without, the substance of all pots is the
substance with which they are made; the Essential Nature
of all the waves, big, small, or tiny is nothing other than
the ocean from which they are born.
Pure awareness is the Eternal Truth in which the
unmanifest comes to be projected forth as the manifest.
But for the cotton, the weaver's unmanifested conception
of beauty and proportion cannot be projected and spread
out through his creative art of weaving a design on the
cloth he is making. At all points in that design of cloth, the
one factor without which the design cannot stand is the
substance of the threads in the cloth --- the cotton.
610
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Pure Awareness, poured into the moulds of vasanas, when
frozen with "ignorance," becomes the multiple world of
names and forms --- recognised, craved for, and fought
over to acquire and to possess --- everywhere by everyone.
Therefore, one who has identified oneself with the Self, in
that vivid experience, comes to understand the very
Essence out of which the confusing multiplicity has risen
up into manifestation, to confound the stupid ego and to
torment it with the delusory dream of its samsara!
After enumerating the two distinct ways of procedure to
go back from the manifest to the unmanifest, in the
following, Krishna devotes an entire section to explain the
different routes taken by seekers to reach the two different
destinations. Some reach a destination from where there is
a return and others attain a level of experience from which
there is no return.
WHAT ARE THE TWO PATHS?
23. Now at what time (path) departing, YOGINS go, never to
return, as also to return, that time (path) , I will tell you, O
Chief of Bharatas.
The Lord has already explained that there are two goals in
life which men seek: the extrovert life of satisfying the ego
and gaining its flickering joys among the sense-objects ---
each experience of which soon sours itself to become
sorrow; and the Divine Mission of seeking the
611
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Imperishable by ending the ego in a re-discovery of its
own real Nature as nothing other than the Eternal
Consciousness, the Changeless Substratum of the whole
universe.
These two goals, it has been indicated, differ from each
other inasmuch as the former ensures a return again to a
finite embodiment, to live the consequent ego-centric life
of limitations, and the latter promises a goal, having
reached which, there is no return. The Realised One comes
to experience and enjoy the Infinite Beatitude of the Bliss
Absolute as his own Real Self.
If thus, there are two goals to be gained, there must
necessarily be two different paths guiding the two types
of seekers to their respective destinations. In the stanza
under review, the Lord promises that he will explain to
"the Chief of the Bharata family," both the "Path of return"
and the "Path of no-return."
There is a pun on the word 'Kale' used here; it shows both
the TIME of departure and the PATH pursued by the
different types of seekers at the end of their present
manifestations.
THE PATH PURSUED BY THOSE WHO HAVE NO
RETURN IS AS FOLLOWS:
612
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
24. Fire, light, day-time, the bright fortnight, the six months of
the northern solstice; following this path, men who know
BRAHMAN go to BRAHMAN.
Here, in the stanza, the path of "gradual liberation"
(Krama-mukti) is explained. According to the Upanishadic
tradition, "he who lived a life of rituals (Karmas) and
worship (Upasana), to enjoy the result so accrued, will
walk the 'Path-of-the-gods' (Devayana) and entering
through the Sun, will go beyond it to Brahma-loka." There
he enjoys the super-sensuous Bliss till the end of the
"cycle," when, along with the Creator, he gets total
liberation. This 'Path-of-the-gods,' is indicated here by the
terms borrowed from the Upanishads which have a wealth
of suggestiveness to all students of the Rishi-declarations.
FIRE, FLAME, DAY-TIME, THE BRIGHT FORTNIGHT,
THE SIX MONTHS OF THE NORTHERN SOLSTICE OF
THE SUN --- These indicate the "Path-of-the-gods"
presided over by the Sun. In the Prashnopanishad this has
been vividly brought out when the Upanishad supplies the
students with a theory of the creation of multiplicity from
the one Great Truth. It is explained that Prajapati, the
Creator, Himself became the Sun and the Moon, and these
two phenomenal objects are mentioned as representing
energy and matter respectively.
Identifying with the Dynamic Centre in himself, a seeker
tries to live the life. Such an Upasaka of Truth, at the time
613
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of his departure from his present manifestation in the
world, comes to think of the object of contemplation of his
whole life-time, and naturally, he goes to the world of his
thoughts --- "as you think so you become." By entertaining
evolutionary thoughts in one's mind all through one's life,
one must, after leaving the present embodiment, walk the
ascending path of evolution, the 'Path-of-the-gods,'
indicated here as "THE PATH OF LIGHT AND FIRE, OF
DAY TIME, OF THE BRIGHT FORTNIGHT, OF THE
NORTHERN SOLSTICE OF THE SUN." Thus, in the
mystic language of the Upanishads, the path pursued by
those who are great devotees of Brahman, the Eternal, is
described as stretching towards the North. These
implications are all epitomised and the Upanishadic Rishis
often use the term "Northern Route" to indicate "the Path
of the Gradual Liberation."
AS CONTRASTED WITH THIS PATH OF NO-RETURN
THERE IS THE PATH OF SURE-RETURN WHICH IS
EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING:
25. Smoke, night-time, the dark fortnight, also six months of the
southern solstice, attaining by these to the Moon, the lunar
light, the 'YOGI' returns.
"The Path of Return" is called the "Path of the Ancestor"
(Pitryana), and is considered as presided over by the
Moon, which represents the world-of-matter. Those who
leave the world after spending their lifetime in doing good
614
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and performing rituals (karmas), unaccompanied by any
worship (upasana), are those who go to the World-of-
Ancestors (Pitrus), otherwise popularly known as Heaven.
These denizens of Heaven, on having exhausted their
merits, gained by them through their divine actions, will
have to return into deserved embodiments, ordered by
their individual vasana-balance that is ardently pressing
for expression and fulfilment.
SMOKE, NIGHT-TIME, THE DARK FORTNIGHT, THE
SIX MONTHS OF THE SOUTHERN SOLSTICE --- These
indications chalk out "the Path through the Moon"
(Pitriyaana) to the world of the ancestors. The moon, as we
said, represents the world-of-matter and is the presiding
deity of the sense enjoyments. Such people do return after
having attained through the grace of the Moon the
Heavenly enjoyments for a period.
In short, these two stanzas indicate that, in his life-time, a
seeker struggling to raise himself above the various
matter-envelopments and his identifications with them,
reaches the higher spiritual realms from where, in the
stream of his spiritual progress, he reaches the Ultimate.
But in case he be a courter of pleasures, ever singing at the
temple of sensuality, then he falls on the path of realising
those developed instincts, and comes back again into the
field of action here --- wherein he can again make or
unmake himself.
IN CONCLUSION KRISHNA ADDS:
615
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
26. The Path of Light and the Path of Darkness available for the
world are verily thought to be both eternal; by the one, the "Path
of Light, " a man goes to return not; by the other, the "Path of
Darkness, " he returns again.
The two paths so vividly described above, are renamed
here as the 'Path-of-Light' and the 'Path-of-Darkness,'
according to the goal to which each "path" leads the
pilgrims. One takes the travellers to the brilliant heights of
evolutionary success; the other into the dark abyss of
devolutionary sorrow. These two "paths" described here,
in their general implications, can be considered as
showing the 'Path-of-Moksha' and the 'Path-of-Samsara.'
The ways of life in any given generation always fall under
two categories --- the secular and the sacred. The former,
the secular, is pursued by those who feel that food,
clothing and shelter are the absolutes and the fulfilment of
life lies in the satisfaction of the largest number of physical
and emotional sense-ticklers, and whose intellects are cold
and satisfied, feeling no urge to seek anything nobler and
diviner. The latter, the sacred, however, is pursued by
those who can feel no encouragement in their bosom,
when the sense-objects giggle and dance in front of their
sense-organs, and whose intellects are ever on fire with a
great seeking of something beyond, something deeper
than the mere surface existence in life.
616
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
These two 'paths' --- which mean not only the two
impulses of the sacred and the secular, but also all those
who follow these two paths --- the seekers of materialism
and the seekers of spirituality --- "ARE TO BE
CONSIDERED AS TRULY ETERNAL." In the largest
sense of the term, these two impulses together constitute
the entire Samsara, and since the world of finitude and
change is eternal, these two contrary impulses are also
eternal. But it is the Vedantic theory, approved and upheld
by the lived experiences of the Seers and Sages, that
Samsara for the individual can be ended.
Subjectively considered, this stanza may perhaps have a
secret suggestion to make to true Yogis --- meaning, the
sincere meditators. Even in an elderly Sadhaka, who has
been on the 'path' for years, the existing vasanas in him
may now and then come up to insist upon his
extroversion. At such moments of inner revolt in us, we,
as seekers and meditators, need not at all get
flabbergasted because, as the Lord explains, the
aspirations for the higher-life and the temptations for the
lower-existence are the two opposing forces that are
eternally at tug-of-war with each other.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE GAIN IN KNOWING THESE
TWO PATHS, AND THEIR ETERNAL NATURE?
27. Knowing these paths, O Partha, no YOGIN is deluded;
therefore, at all times be steadfast in YOGA , O Arjuna.
617
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After knowing that the "Path of Light" and the "Path of
Darkness" are the two opposing forces that function in our
mental life eternally, a true seeker will not fall into any
sense of despair, when he watches a revolt rising in his
bosom. "NO 'YOGI' IS DELUDED, KNOWING THESE
PATHS."
The entire line of argument pursued by Krishna, is to
reveal slowly and steadily the "Path of Return" and the
"Path of No-Return" and now, in this, the penultimate
stanza of this chapter, the Lord summarises the thesis and
purpose, and says, "THEREFORE, ARJUNA, YOU BE A
'YOGI' AT ALL TIMES." Here, he who has withdrawn
himself from his false identifications and has come to fix
his single-pointed mind in the contemplation of the Self, is
a Yogi.
In short, the entire chapter is a divinely powerful plea
recommending that Arjuna should, even while acting in
the world, continuously strive to be one living in the
awareness of the Divine, through a process of selfless
identification with the Eternal, Imperishable Purusha.
BY MERE MEDITATION HOW WILL WE GAIN THE
SPECIFIC MERITS THAT ARE PROMISED BY THE
SHRUTI AND THE SMRITI WHEN WE FOLLOW
CERTAIN NOBLE ACTIONS IN LIFE?
618
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
28. Whether fruit of merit is declared (in the scriptures) as
springing up from study of the VEDAS, from performance of
sacrifices, from practice of austerities, and from charity ---
beyond all these goes the YOGIN, who having known this (the
two 'paths' ) attains to the Supreme, Primeval (Essence) .
Here Krishna is emphasizing that meditation can be
undertaken by anyone who is even slightly capable of it,
because, the Lord explains, "WHATEVER MERITORIOUS
RESULTS ARE PROMISED IN THE SCRIPTURES TO
ACCRUE FROM THE STUDY OF THE VEDAS,
PERFORMANCE OF YAJNAS, PRACTICE OF
AUSTERITIES, AND SELFLESS CHARITY," a true Yogi,
meaning, a sincere meditator, gains them all. Besides, the
Lord is emphatic when He says, "THE YOGI EVER RISES
OVER ALL THESE." Attempts at meditation can integrate
the personality a million times more easily and quickly
than by the slower processes described above --- it being
understood that the devoted meditator has developed in
himself the necessary amount of dispassion, and
discriminative thinking. Even these can grow when
meditation is pursued regularly and sincerely.
When thus, a meditator who has, through meditation,
gained the results of selfless Karma and Upasanas,
continued his practices, he learns to soar higher and
higher, until at last he comes to realise "THIS," the
Imperishable Purusha, and ATTAINS TO THE
PRIMEVAL, SUPREME ABODE --- having attained
which, MY HIGHEST STATE, there is no return.
619
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eightth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN.
Here the term "YOGA OF THE IMPERISHABLE
BRAHMAN" is to be understood as "THE WAY TO THE
IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN." After answering in this
chapter the questions raised by Arjuna, the Lord was
borne away on the high tides of His Divine inspiration, to
explain how those who can remember the Infinite at the
time of their departure from the body will reach the
Infinite. Therefore, He advised Arjuna to remember the
Infinite always and face his life diligently.
Naturally, Krishna has to explain what is the nature of
that Infinite upon which the seeker is to fix his single-
pointed mind. We had thus, in stanzas 9 and 10, a set of
brilliant phrases, which, in their suggestive-ness, explain
the Inexplicable. Having described the Imperishable
BRAHMAN, Krishna explains the "Path-of-Light" and the
"Path-of-Darkness," the former leading to the
Imperishable, and the latter abducting the ego away from
its divine ]home into the 'house of pain and finitude.'
Rightly, indeed, has the chapter been captioned as "THE
WAY TO THE IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN."
Om Om Om Om Om
620
