Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 7
Jnana Vijnana Yoga
The Yoga of Wisdom and knowledge
The Blessed Lord said: 1. With the mind intent on Me, Partha,
practising YOGA and taking refuge in Me, how thou shalt,
without doubt, know Me fully, that do thou hear.
It would be, naturally, the doubt of all seekers, especially
before they enter the seat of meditation, as to how it is
possible for a limited mind to understand or embrace the
unlimited. This doubt can come to such seekers, who try
only for intellectual appreciation of the philosophy of
Vedanta; but all seekers could only be, in the beginning,
mere scholarly students of the Vedantic literature. This is
an unavoidable state in the Path of knowledge. The
Science of Vedanta exhaustively deals with this problem
and tries to explain how the mind, when made to meditate
upon the Infinite, comes to transcend its own limitations
and comes to experience the Infinite.
Here Krishna, introducing the theme to be dealt with in
the next six chapters, assures Arjuna that He would
explain the entire science and technique, which will
clearly show how a meditator, by fixing his integrated
mind upon the contemplation of the NATURE of the Self,
can come to experience the Divine. From this chapter
503
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
onwards the term 'mind' is to be understood, not as a
debilitated and disintegrated mind, but as an integrated
mind properly tutored to walk, implicitly obeying the will
of the discriminative intellect. When such a mind is firmly
established in full concentration upon the divine nature of
its Godly potentialities, the seeker evolves double quick.
The logic of this inward development, it is promised, will
be the theme of this section.
NOW LISTEN TO WHAT I AM GOING TO SAY AS TO
HOW YOU ALSO, THUS ACTING, WILL, WITHOUT
DOUBT, KNOW ME IN FULL, POSSESSED OF INFINITE
GREATNESS, STRENGTH, GRACE AND OTHER
APPARENT ATTRIBUTES:
2. I shall declare to thee in full this knowledge combined with
realisation, which being known, nothing more here remains to
be known.
According to Shankara, speculative knowledge is Jnana,
and actual experience of the perfection is Vijnana. Here
Krishna is promising that he would not only deliver to
Arjuna the theoretical explanation of the Art of Divine
Life, but also, during the very discourse, take him to the
highest peak of Self-rediscovery. This may look rather
unbelievable but unlike Yoga and other types of
philosophies in India, Vedanta is not an indirect process,
inasmuch as, after the study of this Shastra, it is not
necessary for A FIT STUDENT to retire into the jungles to
504
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
practise and bring the experience of perfection into his
cognition.
During the very discourse, if the student is mentally fit to
walk along with the teacher step by step and follow
carefully the logic and significance of his explanations, he
can gain glimpses of realisation during the very hours of
his study. It is because of this that Vedanta is taught only
to a student who has been made fit for this flight to the
beyond. If an individual student is perfectly integrated
inwardly and if he can continuously maintain his
adventurous thirst to experience the Reality, then he, in
his attempt to identify himself with the thought and the
spirit of his teacher's discourses, can ultimately come to
revel in the experience of the very goal that is indicated by
Vedanta. Self-realisation is instantaneous, during the study
and understanding of scriptures, gained through the
teacher-taught discussions.
IF VEDANTA IS THUS A COMPLETE SCIENCE, AND
THE EXPERIENCE OF THE DIVINITY OF THE SELF
CAN BE HAD EVEN DURING THE VERY TEACHER-
TAUGHT DISCUSSIONS, HOW IS IT THAT SELF-
REALISED MASTERS ARE SO RARE IN THE WORLD?
LISTEN:
3. Among thousands of men, one perchance strives, for
perfection; even among those successful strivers, only one
perchance knows Me in essence.
505
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The idea that Vedantic realisation and knowledge can
come into the experience of only a rare few has been
repeatedly emphasised in different portions of spiritual
literature in India, by different Masters, in different
expressions. We were told previously (II-29) how the very
theoretical side of Vedanta is heard and understood as
marvel. In the Upanishads also, the same idea has been
very clearly expressed by the Rishis.
Here, however, Krishna shifts the entire responsibility for
not realising the Self upon the individual seeker himself
and attributes it entirely to the sadhaka's lack of self-
application. Vedanta being a subjective science, it is not
sufficient that we know how to eradicate our weaknesses
and cultivate our inward strength, but we must also live
up to those ideals and try to bring about the necessary re-
adjustments in ourselves. Very few can discover in
themselves this necessary urge to evolve.
Of the thousands that hear intelligently, and perhaps
understand all the theory and text of Vedanta, only a few
sincerely apply themselves to live fully the Vedantic way-
of-life. Even among a thousand such sincere seekers, only
a rare-few "COME TO KNOW ME AND MY REAL
NATURE."
The chances are that when this Vedantic way of life is
perfectly explained by a Sad-Guru to a student, who is
seemingly attending with all enthusiasm, with sincerity
and concentration, he may raise himself up to, perhaps,
506
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the very gates of Truth, but there, he himself may come to
bar his own entry into the sanctum 'within.' There, some
imperceptible vanity, or unsuspected desire, is sufficient
to exile him from himself. In this sense, there is a wealth of
meaning in Lord Christ's declaration that a camel can pass
through the eye-of-a-needle more easily then a "rich" man
through the gates of heaven --- the RICHES here are not
the 'worldly wealth,' but the individual's mental vasana-
wealth. Unless the mind is perfectly naked, it has no entry
into the Bliss of Truth.
Viewing the stanza in the light of the Krishna-spirit, it
only means that rare indeed are people who come to
study sincerely and get a true glimpse of the Vedanta-
literature, and only a low percentage of these again can
discover in themselves the necessary mental stamina, the
intellectual vision and the physical forbearance to live that
life of truth and purity in the world. Since Arjuna and all
the students of the Geeta are such rare souls, they
represent the community of evolvers. To them Krishna
promises that He can, through His Divine Song, not only
deliver the speculative part of the philosophy of Vedanta
but also practically hand over chances to live subjectively
the vital moments of vivid inner experience of the Self.
HAVING PREPARED THE HEARER FOR THE
TEACHING, BY INDUCING IN HIM A TASTE FOR IT,
THE LORD PROCEEDS THUS:
507
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
4. Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, egoism --- these
are My eight-fold PRAKRITI.
In an attempt to explain the world outside as a marriage
between matter and spirit, great thinkers of the Vedic
period had exercised their philosophical acumen and had
given us the Sankhyan Philosophy. According to them, the
Spiritual Factor (Purusha) presiding over a given matter
envelopment, dynamises the inert matter and makes the
insentient mineral assembly to act, as though it is
intelligent and vital. This idea becomes clear to us when
we take an example from the modern world.
With steel and iron, the manufacturer completes a steam-
engine and when the cold engine is harnessed to steam, at
high pressure, it does work. Steam by itself can never
express its dynamic capacity and strength; on the other
hand, when it is made to work through a given
equipment, it is capable of adding motion and
performance to the inert iron assemblage.
Thus, one of the schools of philosophy in India tries to
explain scientifically, how the Eternal and the Perfect Self
comes to express Itself as the world-of-plurality, in the
embrace of matter. This also explains the relationship
between Spirit and matter. The technical terms used in the
philosophy for those two items are: Prakriti, for the
"matter-envelopments," and Purusha for the "Spirit-factor."
508
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna explains in this and the following stanza, all the
items that together constitute the matter and those that
constitute the Spiritual Entity within a living man. Once
the individual comes to understand clearly the distinction
between matter and Spirit he will indeed come to
understand that the Spirit identifying with matter, is the
cause for all Its sufferings and when It is detached from Its
identifications, it rediscoveres for itself its own essential
nature as Perfection and Bliss Absolute. The spirit
identifying with matter, and sharing the destinies of the
inert equipment, is called the "ego" (Jeeva). It is the "ego"
that comes to rediscover itself to be nothing other than the
Spirit that presides over matter.
In order to make Arjuna realise how exactly one is to
understand the true nature of the Self, in all Its divine
might and glory, Lord Krishna tries to enumerate the
matter-aspect, as distinct from the Spiritual-Truth in each
individual.
The five great elements, mind, intellect and ego constitute,
according to the Geeta, the eight-fold Prakriti that has
come to be superimposed upon the Truth through
ignorance. The five great cosmic elements are represented
in the microcosm by the five sense-organs by which the
individual comes to experience and live in the world of
sense-objects. Thus, the list making up Prakriti is nothing
other than the subtle body and its vehicles of expression
are constituted of the sense-organs. The sense-organs are
the channels through which the world of stimuli reaches
509
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
within, and the inner point of focus of the five sense-
organs is called the "mind". The impulses received by the
mind are rationally classified and systematised into the
knowledge of their perception by the intellect. At all these
three levels of sense perception, mental reception, and
intellectual assimilation, there is a continuous sense of I-
ness, which is called the "ego". These constitute the
equipments through which, at the touch of Life, man
functions as the intelligent being that he is.
WHAT THEN IS YOUR HIGHER NATURE? LISTEN:
5. This is the "lower" PRAKRITI; different from it, know thou,
O mighty-armed, My "Higher' ' PRAKRITI , the very Life-
element, by which this world is upheld.
After enumerating in the above stanza the "lower" nature
of the Self, Krishna says that this is not all. The Self
possesses, besides these equipments, a Higher-Nature
which is constituted of Pure Consciousness, or Awareness.
It is this Spiritual Entity that makes it possible for the
body, mind and intellect, made up of mere inert minerals,
to act as if they were in themselves so vitally sentient and
intelligent.
The Spiritual Factor is the entity by whose contact the
equipments function, and without which the equipments
become dull and insentient. If Consciousness were not in
us, we would not be able to experience either the world
510
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
outside or the world within us. It is the Consciousness that
maintains, nourishes, and sustains all the possibilities in
us. Without this Spiritual Spark functioning in us, we
would be no more intelligent or divine than the "stone-
world".
Even by a more material consideration, we can logically
come to accept the conclusions declared in this stanza. I
am standing on the floor of my house; the house is
supported by my piece of land; the land is protected by
the city Corporation; the city is supported by the country;
and the country is supported by the world; the world is
supported by water --- the waters of the ocean; water is
held in position by the atmosphere, and the atmosphere is
a part of the planetary system! The universe stays in
space, and this space rests upon the "concept of space" that
is in our mind! The mind gets its support from the
judgement of the intellect. Since the decision of the
intellect is known and realised by the Consciousness in us,
this Spiritual Entity is, indeed, the ultimate support for the
entire world-of-change (Jagat)!!!
In philosophy, the term Jagat means not only the world of
objects perceived by us though our sense-organs, but it
includes in its concept, the world experienced through
and interpreted by the mind and intellect also. Thus the
world-of-objects, the world-of-feelings, and the world-of-
ideas that we experience, together, in their totality,
constitute the Jagat. This is supported by the Conscious
Principle with Its grace showering upon them all. In this
511
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sense also, Krishna's declarations are scientifically true,
when He says that the "Higher" Prakriti, the Principle of
Consciousness, is that
"BY WHICH THIS ENTIRE WORLD OF EXPERIENCES IS
SUSTAINED."
HOW IS THE SELF THE CREATOR, SUSTAINER AND
THE DESTROYER OF THE WORLD? LISTEN:
6. Know that these (two PRAKRITIS ) , are the womb of all
beings. So I am the source and dissolution of the whole universe.
The above-mentioned Higher and lower-nature, each
functioning in the embrace of the other, cause all the
manifestations of the world of plurality. If matter were not
there, the latent dynamism in the Spirit will not find a
field for Its expression. Matter, by itself, in its inertness,
will not be able to express the similitude of Consciousness
unless the Spirit were there to dynamise it. Electricity,
expressing itself through the filament in the bulb,
manifests as light. Without the bulb, the light in the
electricity cannot manifest itself, nor can the bulb smile
forth in light without the electrical current flowing
through it. The bulb is the equipment, functioning
through which, electricity expresses itself as light.
Similarly, the Spirit, when it comes to function through
the five layers of matter, discovers for Itself a field to
express Its own potentialities.
512
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Keeping this idea in mind, Lord Krishna declares here:
"THESE TWO ARE THE WOMB OF ALL BEINGS." It is
not very difficult for an intelligent student to understand
what it actually means. Not only does the pluralistic
world of objects, feelings, and ideas rise from, and stay in
the Spirit, but it dissolves into It, again to become the
Higher-Nature. Thus, the lower-nature is, in its essential
constitution, nothing other than the Higher. The Higher,
forgetting Its own divinity, identifies Itself with the lower
and comes to the ego-centric sorrows and imperfections.
The Higher seemingly suffers, at present, in Its own
delusions, the sorrows of the lower. Its own rediscovery of
Its native divine glory is the redemption of matter. The
idea that the lower has arisen from the Higher is likened
to the way in which pots of different shapes and colours
have all arisen from the mud. Just as the mud is the truth
in all the pots, the Higher is the essential Reality in all the
objects of the sense-organs, mind and intellect which the
lower procreates.
THEREFORE:
7. There is nothing whatsoever higher than Me, O Dhananjaya.
All this is strung in Me, as clusters of gems on a string.
There are two possible points of view of life, if the above-
mentioned theory is accepted. There is a point of view
from the lower and distinctly different from it, there is a
point of view from the Higher also. Just as in mud there
513
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are none of the different shapes and colours of the pots, so
too in the Pure Consciousness there is none of the worlds-
of-objects, or feelings or ideas. "BESIDES ME THERE IS
NAUGHT."
After waking up, to the waker, there is nothing of the
dream-world for his recognition. In the endless waves that
rise in the ocean there is nothing other than the ocean
itself. None of the waves can rise, nor stay, nor ultimately
reach anywhere but the ocean itself. In short, nothing can
remain ever totally divorced from its own essential-
nature.
The first line indicates that each one of us has a "lower-
nature" which is married to our own Self, but still, the
doubt might come into the minds of the students of the
Geeta, "that the Self in me is different from the Self in all
others." This logic of thinking may, as a result, take us to
the conclusion that there are as many different Selves as
there are different bodies in the world.
To show that the Self is one and the same in all forms, it
has been said here that the Lord is the common factor in
all forms in the universe. He holds them all intact as the
string holds all the pearls in a necklace. These words have
deep significance. Not only is it beautiful in its poetic
suggestion, but it has also a very exhaustive philosophical
implication. The pearls in the necklace are necessarily
uniform and homogeneous, and its thread, which is
generally unseen, passes through the central core of every
514
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
pearl, and holds them all, the big and the small, into a
harmonious ornament of beauty.
Again, the substance of which the pearls are made is
totally different from the constituents that go to make the
thread. Similarly, the world is constituted of an infinite
variety of names and forms, which are all held together by
the Spiritual Truth into a complete whole. Even in an
individual, the mind, the intellect, the body, each different
from the others, can harmoniously work and unitedly give
the music of life for him because the same Conscious
Principle works through all those different and varying
matter-envelopments.
Here is an instance wherein we see Shri Veda Vyasa
typically expressing himself as the poet-philosopher of the
world. This example is not only poetical but also deeply
philosophical.
FURTHER:
8. I am the sapidity in water, O son of Kunti, I am the light in
the moon and the sun; I am the syllable OM in all the VEDAS,
sound in ether, and virility in men;
9. I am the sweet fragrance in earth and the brilliance in fire, the
life in all beings, and I am austerity in the austere.
515
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
How the Supreme Self can be the "thread" upon which the
'pearls' consisting of individual elements of plurality are
strung together to become the 'necklace' of the
harmonious universe, is described in these two verses. It
has already
been said, "MY HIGHER PRAKRITI, THE PRINCIPLE OF
CONSCIOUSNESS," is the womb of all beings, and that
"BEYOND ME THERE IS NAUGHT." What can be this
Eternal Factor, which is common in every one --- and yet
not readily perceptible to all --- is the doubt that has been
cleared here.
That which remains in a substance from the beginning to
the end, constantly, and without which the thing cannot
ever maintain its identity, is called its Dharma --- which is
its LAW OF BEING. The examples of 'sapidity in water.'
'radiance in the sun and the moon,' 'OM in all Vedas,'
'sound in Akasa,' sweet smell in earth,' luminosity in fire,
'manhood in man,' and 'austerity in the austere' --- all
clearly indicate that the Self is that which gives each
individual phenomenon its own existence. In short, as the
stanza declares, the Self is the LIFE IN ALL BEINGS.
AS A MORE VIVID EXAMPLE, FOR THE READY GRASP
OF GROSSER INTELLECTS, THE LORD GIVES THE
FOLLOWING SET OF EXAMPLES:
516
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
10. Know Me, O Partha, as the eternal seed of all beings; I am
the intelligence of the intelligent. The splendour of the splendid
(things and beings) , am I.
Not satisfied with the above enumeration --- which can
truly indicate its full significances only to those who have
a fairly well-developed subtle intellect --- the Lord is
compelled to indicate the same Truth through a set of
more obvious examples. He says in the stanza, "I AM THE
ANCIENT SEED OF ALL BEINGS." Not satisfied with this
statement, as an artist would mix more colours afresh and
paint, again and again, to bring out his theme more
vividly to the perception of the on-lookers, Bhagawan
gives here two more beautiful instances by which we can
get an insight into the relationship between the gross
perceivable matter and the subtle imperceptible Spirit.
I AM THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE INTELLIGENT ---
The intelligent man constantly expresses a greater amount
of divinity in his thoughts and ideas. In that intelligent
man, the Self is the intelligence, that subtle-power,
because of which the individual is capable of manifesting
such brilliant comprehension. Similarly, it is also said that
the Self is that which beams out through the beautiful and
the energetic.
In other words, through the instrument of our intellect, it
is the Consciousness in us that expresses itself as an
intelligent individual. As a parallel we can say that
517
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
electricity is the "light in the bulb", is the "heat in the
heater", is the "music in the radio."
YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE IS GIVEN IN THE
FOLLOWING VERSE:
11. Of the strong, I am the strength --- devoid of desire and
attachment, and in (all) beings, I am the desire --- unopposed to
DHARMA, O best among the Bharatas.
Having thus served with different samples the seekers of
the average intelligence and the dullest in this stanza the
Lord is trying to indicate the Eternal Self to the MOST
INTELLIGENT students, who have the capacity to do
subtle reflection upon such philosophical ideologies.
I AM THE STRENGTH IN THE STRONG --- This
statement is evidently as easy of comprehension as the
example given in the previous stanza. But the statement
out-shines the above set of examples when here, Krishna
gives the phrase qualifying "Balam." Generally, an
individual expresses his might and strength only when he
is goaded by his desires or attachments.
Without these two inner urges it is impossible for us to see
any expression of might or strength. Desire (Kama) and
attachment (Raga) are generally considered by students of
Vedic literature as almost synonyms; but Shankara, in his
commentary, has very thoughtfully given us the
518
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
distinction between these two powerful impulses. He says
Kama is 'desire for what is absent' at present in the scheme
of our life, and Raga is 'affection for what one already has.'
These are the two emotions, lashed by which, individuals
or communities, or societies or nations, generally express
their might and strength (Balam). Riots and agitations,
battles and wars, are all ever motivated by these two
dangerous urges. In the subtle definition of the Self, the
Lord brings a new life of thought here for the
contemplation of the seeker. He says, the Self is not merely
the strength in the strong but "I AM THE STRENGTH
DEVOID OF DESIRE AND ATTACHMENT."
As though not satisfied with his own definition, the Lord
gives yet another example. "I AM DESIRE IN BEINGS,
UNOPPOSED TO DHARMA." We have already explained
the term Dharma as the 'LAW OF BEING.' The essential
factor in man is the Divine Consciousness. All actions,
thoughts and ideas entertained by him which are not
opposed to his essential Divine Nature constitute his
Dharma. All actions and thoughts that hasten the evolution
of man to rediscover his essential Divine Nature are
considered righteous action (Dharma), while all activities
of the mind and intellect that take him away from his true
Divine Nature and make him behave like an animal and
degrade him in his evolutionary status, are called
unrighteous behaviour (A-dharma).
With this understanding of the term Dharma, the second
line of the stanza becomes very clear. "ALL DESIRES
519
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THAT ARE NOT UNRIGHTEOUS FOR THE BEINGS,"
therefore means the glorious urge in the EVOLVERS to
meet their own inner weaknesses courageously and bring
out a complete consummation of their evolutionary urge
to seek and to discover the goal of Self-perfection. This is
the subtle power that is indicated here. The Lord says: 'I
am not the Sadhaka, but I am the burning aspiration in
him, to discover and become one with the Immutable Self.'
BY THE ABOVE EXAMPLES, DOES IT MEAN THAT
THE SPIRIT HAS BEEN REALLY CAPTURED AND
JAILED IN BY MATTER? HOW CAN THE LIMITED
LIMIT THE UNLIMITED? LISTEN:
12. Whatever beings (and objects) that are pure, active and
inert, know them to proceed from Me; yet, I am not in them,
they are in Me.
In this stanza, the Lord concludes the topic of His
discussion, which He undertook while commenting upon.
His own statement, "ALL THIS IS STRUNG IN ME AS A
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."
The term Maya, as used in Vedantic literature, is nothing
other than the different impulses under which the mind
and intellect of the living kingdom act. The infinite
varieties of thoughts and ideas that rise in the heart of the
living kingdom have been observed and classified under
the three main moods, governed by which alone do the
520
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
instruments of feeling, thinking and action come to play
their parts everywhere. These three characteristics, the
eternal moods of the "subtle-body," are called 'unactivity'
(Sattwa), 'activity' (Rajas), and 'inactivity' (Tamas).
With this knowledge of the three gunas, as they are called,
when we try to understand the stanza, it becomes very
easy reading. "Whatever states pertain to these three
natural temperaments of the heart and the head, they all
rise from the Self." This is a statement which is only a re-
interpretation, in philosophical terminology, of what has
already been explained. The Infinite Consciousness is the
Supreme Reality, the Spirit, upon which matter,
constituting Its lower-nature, is but an APPARENT
experience. They all rise from the Truth, inasmuch as all
the waves rise from the ocean, all mud-pots rise from the
mud, all ornaments made of gold come from gold.
This verse concludes with a beautiful statement which
reads like a conundrum. The use of such arresting
statements is an art deliberately indulged in by Hindu
philosophical writers. It has the charm that invites an
independent, intellectual investigation by the student, all
by himself, upon the declaration, in order that he may find
the sweet secret of its true import and significance.
"STILL, I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME."
Such a statement would necessarily be false in any
situation because, if A is not B, the latter cannot be in the
former --- if "I am not in them, they CANNOT be in me."
521
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This sweet paradoxical statement clearly indicates that the
relationship between Spirit and matter is not in terms of
cause and its effect, but it is only as a super-imposition of
matter upon the Spirit. Addressing the deluded, the post
can only explain, "the ghost of your vision had risen from
me alone, inasmuch as, I alone lend to it its existence; but
I, the post, am not in the ghost." So, too, shall the ocean
cry, "the waves rise, stay and dissolve away in me; but I
am not in the waves."
As Shankara would have it, the Self declares here that
even though matter depends entirely for its existence
upon the Conscious Principle, yet the Divine Spark is in
no way under the thraldom of matter. Matter ekes out its
existence from the Spirit; but, the Spirit is --- in no way at
no time, howsoever little --- controlled, contaminated, or
shackled by the sad lot of the finite, imperfect matter.
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA, LORD KRISHNA
REGRETS THAT THE WORLD DOES NOT
UNDERSTAND HIM IN HIS TRUE NATURE. WHAT IS
THIS IGNORANCE ON THE PART OF THE WORLD
DUE TO? LISTEN:
13. Deluded by these natures (states or things) composed of the
three GUNAS (of PRAKRITI ) all the world knows Me not as
Immutable and distinct from them.
522
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
If there be such a Divine Factor, beyond the usual
cognition of the ordinary mortals, how is it that they are
not in a position to understand, at least the presence, if not
a complete realisation of this great Truth? This question is
answered here in this verse.
DELUDED BY THE MODIFICATIONS OF THE THREE
gunas, the worlds of living creatures become blind to the
divine possibilities in themselves, and live totally a life of
mere identification with the matter-envelopments. The
post is covered by the ghost --- vision for the deluded. It is
a fact that as long as the ghost is viewed, not even a
portion of the post will be available for the perception of
the deluded!
Similarly, identifying with the Maya-products, the Self
comes to play the tragic role of the ego, and the ego, in its
preoccupations with the outer-world and with its idle
imaginations, finds itself incapable of knowing its own
true nature. This play of hide-and-seek --- ourselves with
ourselves in ourselves --- is the strange and mysterious
play of the ego, creating the universal sorrow and the
endless mental squalor therein.
THIS "POWER OF VEILING" IN EVERY ONE OF US IS
DEFINED AND DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:
523
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
14. Verily, this divine illusion of Mine, made up of GUNAS
(caused by the qualities) is difficult to cross over; those who take
refuge in Me, they alone cross over this illusion.
Lord Krishna himself admits that it is not easy for any
ego-centric individual to transcend this delusion in
himself which is caused by "My Maya." If a doctor were to
come and diagnose a disease and declare that there was
no cure for it, nobody will have the faith to follow that
doctor's prescription and advice carefully and cheerfully.
Similarly here, if Krishna's diagnosis of the world's
sorrows and problems is to be defined by the term Maya,
and if the Doctor of the Universe declares that this Maya-
disease is difficult to cure, nobody would faithfully follow
such a sad pessimistic philosophy.
Krishna realises these defects and therefore, immediately
removes any such misconception from the minds of the
students of the Geeta. Sometimes a doctor will have to use
strong words in describing the illness to the patient in
order to bring home to the sufferer the seriousness of his
malady; so too, Krishna is here only bringing home to us,
by a direct merciless thrust, the seriousness of the mental
tragedy into which the Supreme has seemingly fallen, to
become the finite mortal ego! After declaring the
seriousness of the disease and after giving the
prescription, He hastens to guarantee a complete cure for
this painful malady of man.
524
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME ALONE
shall cross over their subjective delusion, which has
created for man the objective worlds of sorrows and
imperfections. How to do this has been already explained
while discussing the technique of meditation, in the last
chapter. With single-pointed mind, to contemplate upon
the Self is the direct path; and in order to walk this
narrow-way, the mind is to be made steady and
concentrated, through the processes that have already
been discussed. (in Chapter VI-14).
THEN WHY ALL THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON
THEE ARE NOT EXPERIENCING THE GLORY?
15 The evil-doers, the deluded, the lowest of men, do not seek
Me; they, whose discrimination has been destroyed by their own
delusions, follow the ways of the demons.
The last stanza talked of those that can successfully
transcend their own subjective delusion, and here,
naturally, Krishna is trying to talk about the negative
nature in those who cannot overcome this delusion to
realise the Divine in themselves. Unless the contrast of
ideas is given, the student will not be in a position to
understand properly what exactly are the mind's
tendencies and appetites that are the true symptoms of
delusion.
525
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
LOW MEN, DELUDED AND INDULGING
THEMSELVES IN EVIL ACTIONS FOLLOW THE PATH
OF THE DEVIL (ASURA) AND GET DEPRIVED OF
THEIR DISCRIMINATION --- We all know that the
insignia of the higher evolution in man is his rational
intellect, which can discriminate between the good and
the bad, the high and the low, the moral and the immoral.
This discriminative awareness is the subtle instrument by
which individuals are rendered capable of awakening
from the dream of their imperfections to their own
Essential Nature of Absolute Divinity.
This faculty can function effectively only in a bosom that
is unagitated by sense-impulses. The more an individual
misunderstands himself to be only a mere mass of flesh,
and continuously pants for self-gratification through sense
indulgences, the more is he considered a sinner. Sin, in
this sense, is but a devolutionary action which is not
appropriate to the dignity and status of the highest
evolutionary glory in man. Sin can be perpetrated only by
those who have deluded themselves, believing that they
are masses of flesh, with minds hungry for emotional
satisfactions and intellects trying to assert and express
their own ideas. Such people are here called by the Geeta,
as deluded (Moodhah). The way-of-life, in such "deluded
men" (Asura bhava) has been exhaustively described to us
by indicating the opposite good qualities of the "perfect
one" (Daivi bhava), later in the Geeta (XVI-3).
526
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PEOPLE REACH ME THROUGH FOUR DIFFERENT
APPROACHES; LISTEN:
16. Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, O Arjuna, the
dissatisfied, the seeker of (systematised) knowledge, the seeker of
wealth, and the wise, O best among the Bharatas.
Since the Self is the source of all existence and energy, all
other apparent activities that are seen at the level of
matter, must come from the same great, grand motive
force. Every part of a railway engine is made up of cold
iron, and if the engine can run forward carrying along
with it a train-load of passengers and goods, there must be
something other than iron that is giving it the power to
move. Similarly, when ego-centric deluded men,
considering themselves to be their body or mind or
intellect, act in the world outside, they express a kind of
seeming dynamism through their matter vestures. When
those who are living in the matter-outskirts of the Palace
of Truth, struggle hard to eke out satisfaction and
happiness, fulfilling their desires, they too act invoking all
their energies from the Spirit.
Even when the deluded ego-centres want to live in their
realm of ignorance and sorrows, they must necessarily
invoke the required energy and sentiency from the Pure
Consciousness, the Self. Whether they seek consolation in
moments of distress, or whether they are mere seekers of
satisfaction for the demands of the body, for the urges of
527
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the mind, for the questions of the intellect, or whether
they be mere men of desires, striving hard to fulfil their
desires or to satisfy their emotions --- they all need the
energy to function, the capacity to feel and the ability to
act. This dynamic motive power can reach the inert matter
and vitalise it, only when the Spirit is invoked and
contacted.
This invocation of the required type of energy to flow into
a particular channel and act therein is called prayer
(Bhajana). In all true prayers the ego surrenders itself to
the Spirit with a demand to its Lord to manifest and
function in any given scheme of activity. As an analogy
we may take the example of how we make use of an
electric plug on the wall. The various equipments such as
the fan, or the heater, or the toaster, or the refrigerator ---
all are in themselves mere iron and steel gadgets which
have no capacity of their own to perform any work. Only
when the electric current is flowing through them, can
these machines serve society.
If I plug a fan into the wall-socket, it is an act where the
fan is, as it were, invoking the dynamic "current" to flow
through it. If the right instrument is contacted with the
"current," I will be served by the required manifestation.
But supposing, in winter, I switch the fan on, I have no
right then to complain that the electricity is cruel to me. If,
unintelligently, I invoke the Truth to play through my
mind which is mal-adjusted with wrong tendencies, the
528
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Spirit flowing through such an instrument can bring about
nothing but sorrows for myself and disturbances to others.
With this scriptural idea that the Self has the total
monopoly of all sentience and life, Krishna says here that
everyone, be he a sinner or a saint, foolish or wise, dull or
energetic, cowardly or courageous, must "invoke Me"
(Bhajana) and "I express Myself through the individual
mental composition as the one who has the above
qualities." "Each individual must approach Me," be it
consciously or unconsciously, ere he can express himself
at the intellectual, mental, or physical level of his
personality.
If everyone must thus invoke the Self in expressing
himself, or in fulfilling his ideas and emotions, then
everyone is "sacred" and "virtuous," for, all of us, without
an exception, are devotees at the Temple of the Spirit.
Lord Krishna, the Self, now expounds how the
numberless persons that reach him with endless prayers,
can all be classified under four distinct groups:-
(a) Men who are dissatisfied with even the best in life
(Arttah) approach this Life Energy in themselves, for
fighting against and for gaining a total relief from the
spiritual distress that is threatening them in their within.
They turn to Me, the Lord.
529
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
(b) Seekers of knowledge and understanding, from a mere
idle curiosity to study and come to know My Nature, ever
invoke the grace of the Spirit.
(c) All men, throughout their life-time, spend themselves
irresistibly in some field of activity or the other, under the
whip of their desires. Fulfilment of desires is the urge
under which every member of the living kingdom acts
restlessly, all through his lifetime. The inert materials of
the body and intellect cannot act unless the Spirit is
invoked to play through them.
(d) We have yet a rare few, who approach the SANCTUM
SANCTORUM of the Temple of the Spirit, demanding
nothing, expecting nothing, carrying with them only
themselves as their offerings. They offer themselves as an
oblation in a pure spirit of love-inspired total self-
surrender. The only cry in their heart is that the Spirit
should end their sense of separation and accept them back
into the embrace of the Lord, to be made one with Him.
These Jnanis constitute the last type who try to invoke the
Spirit.
OF THESE FOUR TYPES WHICH IS THE BEST?
17. Of them the wise, ever steadfast and devoted to the One,
excels; for, I am exceedingly dear to the wise, and he is dear to
Me.
530
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Comparing and contrasting these four above-mentioned
groups among themselves, the Lord declares here that the
Jnani, who with a steadfast mind, surrenders himself to
the Self, with an integrated heart of total devotion, which
is not dissipated by other parallel aspirations, represents
the best. Single-pointedness of mind can be gained only
when the goal of the meditator is fixed and steady. The
unbroken and all-out aspiration of the seeker to reach his
own Real Nature, the Self, is called single-pointed-
devotion (Eka bhaktih).
This is possible only when one withdraws oneself totally
from all other extrovert demands of the lower nature in
him. In the case of a Jnani, therefore, the Spirit is invoked
not for the acquisition of anything, but for the annihilation
of all the self-destructive channels through which his
spiritual dynamism gushes out day-to-day, only to get
wasted on the dry rocks of the world of hallucination.
Naturally, therefore, the Self, as a personification in
Krishna, declares in the Geeta that the Jnanis are the
highest and the best among the living kingdom who reach
the PORTALS OF TRUTH with their individual demands
and aspirations, to experience their final merger in the
Self.
To the truly wise "SUPREMELY DEAR AM I." Love is
measured by the amount of identification the lover has
gained with the beloved. Self-surrender is the tune in
which the song of love is truly sung. Selfessness is the key
in which the duet of love is played. Love demands "giving
531
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
without expecting any return," at all times, in all
circumstances. With this understanding of the nature of
true love, when one tries to understand the attitude of the
Jnani towards the Self, it is true that a Jnani alone knows
how to love wholly, completely.
One-sided love never culminates in any consummation.
Man may approach the Spiritual Centre in himself in an
attitude of discrimination and surrender --- with all his
aspiration and love --- but if it is not reciprocated by the
Spirit, it might become as tragic as the case of the Greek
boy who fell in love with his own reflection. Here, when
Krishna declares, "AND HE IS DEAR TO ME," a great
psychological truth has been expounded. It is the Eternal
Law that love, with no strings attached to it, can not only
order its own fulfilment, but can also convert even the
base into the noble by its silent persuasions and
mysterious charms.
Scientifically viewed, it is an observable fact that if a mind
is powerfully charged with a certain emotion --- be it
sorrow, hatred, jealousy, love or kindness --- it can bring
about sympathetic vibrations of similar emotions in the
chambers of the hearts that come near it. When one full of
hatred approaches us, he can influence and fill our hearts
to the full with hatred. So too, if we can give the required
dose of pure and sincere love, unmotivated by any desire
or selfishness, it is a law that even the bitterest enemies,
with their hearts full of hatred, can be forced to reflect
nothing but love towards us. This psychological truth, in
532
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
all its implications, has been brought out vividly when the
Geeta states that even the Infinite and Eternal Truth has,
helplessly, to come under the charm of pure and selfless
courting of the meditator with Eka bhaktih.
THEN, ARE NOT THE THREE OTHERS, THE
DISSATISFIED AND THE REST, DEAR TO VASUDEVA?
NOT SO. THEN HOW IS IT?
18. Noble indeed are all these, but the wise man, I deem, as My
very Self; for, steadfast in mind he is established in Me alone as
the Supreme Goal.
With the large-heartedness of a master-mind, Lord
Krishna declares here that all creatures living the life of
intelligent seeking and industrious efforts are blessed,
inasmuch as they all are, in their own way, approaching
the same fountain of
the Infinite for tapping out their required energies.
Although some are invoking the Eternal Spiritual Strength
for the purposes of reducing their distress, or for fulfilling
their desires, they all are, for one reason or the other,
approaching the Self, and therefore, relatively, diviner
than the insentient 'mineral world.' However, comparing
and contrasting them with the Jnanis, the Lord says: "BUT,
THE MAN OF KNOWLEDGE, I REGARD AS MY OWN
SELF."
533
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is very well-known that there is a lot of difference
between maintaining one's friendship with the minister,
and oneself becoming a minister. No doubt, to be a friend
of a minister is to gain some amount of influence and
power in society; but the entire might and glory come to
the man when he himself becomes the minister. Similarly,
to be capable of invoking and directing the Spiritual
Strength is certainly divine; but a man of Knowledge is
one who, courting Truth in a spirit of total identification
with It, successfully attains the total transcendence of his
individual mind-and-intellect, whereby his ego
rediscovers itself to be nothing other than the Self. He
becomes one with It.
Such a Jnani, thereafter, ever remains in the divine sense of
identification with the self. This emphasis of extra
preference to the status of a Man-of-Wisdom, is according
to Krishna, his personal opinion (Matam).
19. At the end of many births the wise man comes to Me,
realising that all this is Vasudeva (the innermost Self) ; such a
great soul (MAHATMA) is very hard to find.
That such pure Men-of-Wisdom are necessarily few in the
history of the world, is the declaration here, which, in
decadent Hinduism, we have learnt to consider as an
extremely pessimistic assertion (VI-45). A little thought
should clearly make the fallacy of this wild conclusion
quite evident to us. The entire human kingdom is, indeed,
534
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a very negligible and small proportion of the total sentient
creatures in the world. In the community of man, not all
have a fully developed instrument of rational thinking
and divine emotion.
Even among those who have fully developed mental and
intellectual capacities, it is a rare few that seriously take
up the study of the scriptures. All those who STUDY
scriptures do not LIVE the scriptures, but they come to
feel fulfilled in a mere understanding of its contents.
Therefore, it becomes evident that only a rare few can ever
reach the goal of evolution and come to discover their true
Divine Nature of Perfection.
Like Darwin in our own days, the ancient Rishis also had
observed in their times, that this development can take
place only when, in the flood of time, the different
circumstances have rubbed down and polished the
imperfect into the shape and beauty of the perfect. It takes
trillions of years for an organism to evolve from one given
form of existence into a higher form of life. Naturally, it
becomes quite clear that for rational being of subtlest
potentialities, it should take an indefinitely large number
of lives in different manifestations to scrape off all his
ignorance, and thereby, ultimately reach the Perfect Realm
of all Knowledge.
This DOES NOT MEAN that none among us, now striving
so hard, has any chance of reaching the goal of life in this
very birth. It is not in any pessimistic hopelessness and
535
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
total despair, that this statement is made by the Lord in
the Geeta. On the other hand, it is solely for bringing into
the recognition of the student the urgency of his faithful
pursuit of the higher life. The very fact that a seeker has
come to feel a disappointment with his present state of
existence, and the fact that he has discovered enough
intellectual capacity to appreciate and comprehend the
subtle thoughts of the Upanishadic lore, clearly shows that
he has reached the very archway to the temple of the Self.
A little more sincere and steady self-application can take
him to the highest state of his evolution.
NOW IT WILL BE SHOWN WHY THE PEOPLE ARE
NOT GENERALLY AWARE THAT THE SELF, OR
VASUDEVA, ALONE IS THE ALL:
20. Those whose wisdom has been looted away by this or that
desire, go to other gods, following this or that rite, led by their
own nature.
Desire for the sense-objects of the world and the urge for
sense-gratification are the great factors which cloud the
discriminative potentialities in the human intellect. It is
impossible that an individual is not made conscious of his
own Self, in the light of a powerful and strong
discrimination.
Earlier, we were told that the deity for whose propitiation
we performed the Yajna was none other than "the
536
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
productive potential in any given field of activity."
Reading the stanza in the light of this interpretation we
may say that the deity mentioned here denotes nothing
other than the various joys contained in the different
sensuous fields which are courted by us, when we get
lashed by desires, in order that we may gain a complete
and exhaustive satisfaction from them.
Desires are the springs from which thoughts continuously
gurgle up to flood the mental zone, and disturb the
glorious reflection of Truth in it. When the mind is thus
disturbed, the discriminative capacity in the intellect is
rendered dull, and naturally, that individual becomes
incapable of distinguishing in his understanding, the Real
from the unreal. When the brilliance of the human
intellect has been clouded with the vapours of desire, the
owls of negativity and delusory attachments start hooting
in the jungles of that mind.
It is not the mere appearance of desires in the mind that
causes the fall of man. No individual can resist the
compelling charm of the desires rising in his bosom. But
when he comes to identify himself with them, the
thoughts rising in him are directly governed by his
desires. When once a given desire has been identified
with, the desirer himself, unconsciously, comes to lend an
uncontrollable amount of dynamism to the upsurge of the
flood of thoughts.
537
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thoughts themselves are inert matter, inasmuch as they
are the by-product of food, being constituted of the
subtlest aspect of the food consumed. These inert thought-
waves gather a momentum and force by borrowing their
strength and vigour from the Self, through the
individual's enthusiastic identification with those desires.
The urge of thoughts determines the action. The actor in
the field, for the time-being, is rendered incapable of
discriminating whether the action undertaken can, or
cannot, ultimately bring to him a permanent and an
enduring satisfaction. Drunk with the idea that he will be
at least temporarily appeased, the individual struggles
hard and strives intensively to invoke and propitiate THE
PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL OF ANY GIVEN FIELD OF
HIS ACTIVITY (DEVATA).
In thus invoking the Devata of a given field, the individual
has to strive in a proper and fitting fashion. The methods
of assembling the required instruments, the techniques of
their application, the time intervals necessary for maturing
the results, and the type of gains accrued from the
different kinds of application... all these differ from field
to field in the world. Therefore, each one will have to
"FOLLOW THIS OR THAT RITE," according to the type of
his desires.
The reason why different persons thus struggle hard so
differently, leaving aside all sincere struggles to realise the
Self, as "VASUDEVA IS ALL THIS," is explained here in
the second line. Each individual helplessly functions in the
538
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
different fields of his temporary fascinations, according to
the mental impressions, gathered in his earlier moments
of activity and thought. To conceive that "the Creator is
putting ideas into each one of us because of which one is
good and another vile," is a philosophy of the defeatist, of
the impotent, of the sluggard. True men of action, with the
daring of a well-developed intellect, can very easily see
through men and their behaviours and come to this bold
conclusion that each man acts as per the schedule,
maintained and ordered by himself, during his own past
actions.
In short, a deluded person strives hard, running after the
mirage of sensuality, vainly hoping to gain therein a
satisfaction that is at once infinite and immortal, while
another is found to have the subtle discrimination to
discover for himself the hollowness and futility of sense-
pursuit. This latter type withdraws from all these
ultimately unprofitable fields, and with avidity seeks the
path to the Real.
WHAT THEN IS THE FUNCTION OF THE ATMAN, THE
GUARDIAN ANGLE IN EACH ONE OF US?
21. Whatsoever form any devotee desires to worship with faith --
- that (same) faith of his I make (firm and) unflinching.
In the very opening of this chapter (VII-7), discriminating
the Self from the not-Self, it was shown how Krishna is the
539
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Spiritual Principle, the Common Truth that holds together
the multiple universe of names and forms. It was also said
(VII-14) that the three-fold mental temperaments (gunas),
that work up the "divine illusion," hoodwink the
individual from right cognition of the Divine Self within
him. But for the Conscious Principle thrilling the inert
matter walls that seemingly encircle the spirit, neither our
physical, nor mental, nor intellectual personalities can
ever come to function, as they do now. It is very well-
known that all men do not worship at the same altar. Each
one approaches the same Truth by worshipping the idol of
his own heart. Krishna here declares the sacred truth that
in all Churches, Mosques, and Temples, in public places,
or in private institutions, in the open, or on the sly, in the
quiet huts, and in the silent caves --- wherever and in
whatsoever form, any devotee seeks to worship with
Shraddha, "HIS FAITH DO I MAKE UNWAVERING." A
faithful follower of the Geeta can never be contaminated
by sectarianism or intolerance. At the foot of every altar, it
is Krishna, the Self, that constantly supplies more and
more faith to water the expanding fields of devotion in the
sincere devotees.
Applying this general statement to the subjective worship
in the human bosom, we can very easily understand the
greater import of this stanza.
In the world outside, it is very well-known that the greater
the consistency with which an idea or an attachment is
maintained by an individual, the greater does he become
540
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
fixed in that temperament or relationship. The more often
a particular type of thought is entertained in the mind, the
deeper becomes that thought channel, strengthening that
very mental impression. These deep-cut patterns of
thought, ploughed along the valleys of the mind, indicate
the pattern of desires which the individual had
entertained. In the law that governs this psychological
rule, we can spy and detect the Spiritual Reality and Its
infinite and glorious might.
In short, the Lord says that "as we think so we become,"
and the more we become, the more we think in the same
given pattern. Applying this principle of psychology, it
becomes clear, beyond all doubts, why everyone of us is
bound by our own habits, and how we get chained by our
own peculiar type of thinking. The sensuous are not to be
condemned, and equally so, the divine need not be
congratulated! Both of them are the exact products of their
individual types of thinking. Thought belongs to the
realm of nature (Prakriti); thoughts create the world and
the all-pervading Self is the Essential Substratum
(Purusha) that provides the world-drama with its stage
and scenario.
WITH THIS EVER-GROWING FAITH, HOW DOES THE
MAN-OF-THE-WORLD GAIN HIS PARTICULAR
DESIRE?
541
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
22. Endued with that faith, he engages in the worship of that
'DEVATA' and from it he obtains his desire-fulfilments; all
these being ordained, indeed, by Me (alone) .
Imbued with this faith he invokes the Devata of his choice
and gains the fulfilment of his desires. And, Lord Krishna
adds that in all cases these desires are "BEING VERILY
DISPENSED BY ME ALONE." The Self is the source of all
activities, gains, fulfilments and despairs. The sense of joy
or sorrow, of success or failure, is but a mental thought-
wave; but for the Conscious principle illumining it, we
would not have any such experience.
Faithful activity in any given field of action, brings about
complete success, but the very existence of the field, the
capacity to act, the fervour of faith that supplies
consistency to all efforts --- all these are possible only in
the medium of the Changeless, the Actionless, the
Attributeless, Eternal Self. And Krishna, identifying
Himself with this Spiritual Centre of the Universe, rightly
declares here, that He alone is the one that supplies an
ever-growing faith in all activities, and ultimately, when
the laws of action are fulfilled to the last bit, both in their
intensity and application, it is He alone who dispenses the
exact result of each action.
When a well-adjusted radio is plugged onto the current,
the Electric Current says that it alone is the 'dispenser' of
the programme available at the Station for the listeners!
542
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SINCE THE DELUDED ONES DESIRE THE FINITE
SENSE OBJECTS, THEY DO NOT COME TO THE ALL-
SATISFYING PEACE; AND HENCE, IT IS SAID:
23. Verily the "fruit" that accrues to those men of little-
intelligence is finite. The worshippers of the DEVAS go to the
DEVAS but My devotees come to Me.
The fruits accruing to "THESE MEN OF LITTLE
UNDERSTANDING ARE LIMITED." Fleeting desires for
finite objects, even when fulfilled through the
impermanent activities, must surely prove to be
ephemeral. Out of gold whatever ornament is made, it
also must be gold alone; when chocolate is made out of
sweet things, the resultant stuff cannot be bitter. The
effects entirely depends, for their nature and quality, upon
those of the causes.
Finite actions undertaken in finite fields, employing finite
instruments, cannot but produce --- whether joy or sorrow
--- finite "fruits." Joy arrested or ended is sorrow; and
therefore, in each instance of a sensuous desire satisfied,
though there is a joy and a fulfilment, the sense-of-
satisfaction soon putrefies to provide the sourness of
dissatisfaction, or more often, the bitterness of sorrow.
This statement of the Lord is supported by the following
general rule that, "THE WORSHIPPERS OF THE DEVAS
REACH THE DEVAS." Those who are invoking a desired
543
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'profit potential,' in any given field of activity, can, even
when completely successful, gain only THAT profit.
The above statement is declared as a contrast to a pure
philosophical truth, when the Lord, says: "THOSE WHO
DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME, COME TO ME." Seekers
of happiness in the world of sense-objects, as a result of
their strife and struggle, can gain their insignificant
success in the field of sense-enjoyments. If the same effort
is applied by them in the right life of constructive living,
they can come to discover their identity with the Eternal
Absolute, the Self. Due to the extrovertedness of the
deluded ego, it comes to identify itself with its finite
matter-envolopments, and revels in a world of its endless
number of objects, called in Sanskrit as the Jagat.
Discriminative and careful seekers, understanding the
utter uselessness of the pursuit of finite pleasures, detach
themselves from their false ego-centric lives, and through
the process of meditation upon the Self, as advised in the
previous chapter, come to rediscover their own Real
Nature in the sunny fields of Bliss that lie unrolled beyond
the thorny by-lanes of all physical, psychological and
intellectual quests.
In the language of the Geeta, the first person singular
stands always, at all places, for the Infinite Reality which
is the Substratum for the individual as well as for the
whole. Therefore, "MY DEVOTEES COME TO ME," is not
the assertion of a limited historical figures as the son of
544
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Devaki, but the Singer of the Geeta, in His divine
inspiration, entirely identifies Himself with the Principle
of Consciousness that is the core of the pluralistic dream
of the mind-intellect equipment. Thus, to understand the
above statement, without its seeming limitations, is to
understand the Geeta, the Scripture of Man, as declaring
that the seekers of the Self discover themselves and
become the Self.
THEN WHY DO PEOPLE IN GENERAL FAIL TO
REACH THE SELF? LISTEN:
24. The foolish think of Me, the Unmanifest, as having come to
manifestation, not knowing My higher, immutable and peerless
nature.
Men who lack discrimination and the capacity to perceive
the subtle Truth that shines in and through the vast
disturbances of the endless plurality, fail to realise the
immutable and the peerless Self. In their extreme
preoccupation with the ever-changing glory of the
perceivable, the Prakriti, (VII-4 and 6) they do not
understand that "ALL THIS IS STRUNG IN ME AS A
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."
This fundamental Reality, that is the beam of brilliance in
which like dust-particles the Universes dance about, is
termed as the "Unmanifest." This term is to be understood
in all its philosophical implications. That which is called
545
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the MANIFEST is available either for the perceptions of
the sense-organs, or for the feelings of the mind, or for the
understanding of the intellect. That which is not available
for any one of these instruments of cognition, feeling or
understanding is considered as the UNMANIFEST.
The Self, indeed, should then be considered as the
UNMANIFEST, for it is the VITALITY behind the sense-
organs, the FEELER --- potential in the mind and the very
LIGHT that illumines the intellect.
The distorted intellects of the extroverts, in their
miscalculations, come to the false judgement that the
physical glory of the Prophet, or of the incarnation, is all
that is the Eternal Truth. The point-of-concentration
(Upasya) is to be considered, no doubt, as the symbol of
the Truth which the devotee is seeking, but it cannot IN
ITSELF be the Truth. If it were the Truth, then after
carving out an idol, or after approaching a Guru, the
devotee has nothing more to do, since he has gained the
Truth! Idol worship is only a convenience for gathering
true concentration, for getting an initial momentum for
the final flight into themselves, to reach the Self and
discover therein their own oneness with It.
This stanza gives us a clear insight into the futility of
mistaking the bottle for the medicine, the physical form
for the Guru, the idol for the God! All white-wood is not
the fragrant sandal-wood. Any bright light high up in the
sky, however resplendent it might be, is not a star. Some
546
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
men of incomparable foolishness may come to declare that
the light from a tower is the Sun, but no wise man of the
town will accept it. The idea of Divine Incarnation is
accepted in Hinduism, and according to its theory,
EVERYONE IS AN INCARNATION-TO-A-DEGREE! The
same Truth pervades all, and is in each. It expresses
through the enveloping layers of the mind-and-intellect.
The clearer the mind and the purer the intellect, the
greater is the effulgence of the Divine that beams out
through them.
When the Self in anyone beams out through the steadied
and purified mind and intellect completely sublimating
his lower nature (Prakriti), he becomes a Prophet, a Sage.
Krishna, Rama, Christ, Mohammed, Buddha, Mahavira
are some of the examples. These Men-of-realisation,
discovering their Self, understood and lived every
moment of their lives in the Self, as the Self of all. To
mistake their physical structure, or the lingering traces of
their mind, or the film of their intellectual personality, for
the very Essence of Truth, which these God-men were, is
to make as miserable a mistake as taking the waves to be
the ocean!
Naturally, therefore, Krishna uses here a severe term, to
indicate such deluded men of superstitious false
understanding, as "UNINTELLIGENT FOOLS" (A-
Buddhayah).
547
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT CAUSES THIS PREVALENT IGNORANCE OF
THE TRUE NATURE IS EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
25. I am not manifest to all (in My Real Nature) veiled by
Divine- 'MAYA. ' This deluded world knows not Me, the
Unborn, the Imperishable.
If there be such a glorious Essential Truth, which is the
core of everything, why is it that it is not freely known and
experienced by everyone at all times? In short, "what
stands between me and my Self?" Why is it that we behave
as though we are but limited ego-centric entities,
incapacitated as we are, to comprehend that in essence we
are the Infinite, the Immortal? These questions are
unavoidable to an intelligent seeker, when he, in his
aspirations, comes face to face with the staggering
revelations contained in Vedanta.
THIS DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT, THE
UNBORN AND THE IMMORTAL because their own
"ILLUSION, BORN OUT OF THE THREE 'GUNAS,'
VEILS ME." "Maya" is the most difficult theme of all for
elementary students of Vedanta, when they try merely to
understand this Science of Life objectively. The moment a
student tries to experiment with this "Knowledge" upon
himself subjectively, the explanations contained in the
theory become evident. Maya is the conditioning through
which, when the Non-dual Truth expresses Itself, the One
548
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Reality seems to fan out as the spectrum of the multiple
universe.
The principle of Maya functioning in the individual is
termed ignorance (Avidya). This subjective malady, which
provides in its wake, the dreamy hallucinations of a
sorrowful world of change and imperfections, has been
very closely observed, and the Rishis of old have declared
that it is caused by three types of "moods" in man's inner
personality. These three temperaments (gunas), called
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, provide a prism, viewed through
which, the kaleidoscopic world seems to dance, flashing
its infinite patterns. Rajas creates 'mental-agitations"
(Vikshepa), and Tamas creates the "intellectual-veiling"
(Avarana).
To him who becomes confused and confounded by the
play of these triple temperaments, the Self is not available
for direct experience. Special instructions from teachers
and diligent practice on the part of students are both
necessary in order to make one realise one's own Real
Nature. To an ignorant man of the jungle, electricity is
unmanifest in the bulb and in its incandescent filament. In
order to perceive the electrical current that flows through
the equipment, theoretical knowledge and experimental
confirmation are essential. After having gained the
knowledge of the electrical energy and its properties,
when the student happens to see the very same bulb, he
comes to cognise through the perceived bulb the
imperceptible, the unmanifest electrical energy!
549
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, when through self-control, listening, reflection,
and meditation, the agitations of the mind are quietened,
and when the veiling has been pulled down, the seeker re-
discovers "ME THE UNBORN, THE IMMUTABLE." As
long as the agitations of the mind veil the intellect from its
awareness of the Self, so long the limited ego (Jeeva) pants
to fulfil itself and to gain the Infinite among the gutters of
its sensual cravings!
Such frenzied hearts reeking with desires and lacerated
with disappointments, crushed by dissatisfactions and
smothered by the fear of their own annihilation --- can
never have the integrated equipoise to live even a moment
of still-awareness to experience the Pure Consciousness.
"THE DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT" as it is
steeped in "THE ILLUSION BORN OUT OF THE THREE-
FOLD gunas." Screened off by this universe of names and
forms, which is but an apparent projection of the Self, the
sense-organs, mind or intellect fail to perceive It. The
ghost veils the post! The mirage-waters clothe the desert!!
The waves screen off the ocean!!!
THE PRESENT CONDITION OF IGNORANCE AND
CONFUSION IN THE LIMITED FINITE EGO IS
BROUGHT OUT VERY VIVIDLY IN THE FOLLOWING,
BY CONTRASTING IT AGAINST THE BACK-GROUND
OF THE SELF, WHICH IS OF THE NATURE OF ALL
KNOWLEDGE:
550
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
26. I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, and present and
the future, but no one knows Me.
The idea that God is Omniscient is common to all religions
of the world, but a satisfactory explanation of this concept
is given only in Vedanta. In the Geeta too --- as a Bible of
the Hindu religion, as a hand-book of easy reference for
the students of the Upanishads --- we find a wider hint as
to what we mean by the Omniscience of the Self.
The Self, as the Pure Consciousness, is the illuminating
principle that brings the entire field of the mind and
intellect under the beam of Its clear awareness. Even the
world-of-objects is brought within our understanding
only when it enters, through the sense-organ-doors, and
reaches the mental lake, and makes therein its
characteristic thought-waves;
the thought-waves make the intellect function in
classifying and determining them. Both these mental and
intellectual disturbances are illumined for us by the ever-
wakeful Consciousness, the Self in us.
Sunlight illuminates all the objects of the world. When my
eyes or ears illumine a given form or sound, I say that I
see or hear that particular form or sound. In short, to be
aware of a thing is to know that thing; and to know is to
illumine. Just as the Sun can be considered as the "eye of
the world," inasmuch as without the Sun all organs-of-
vision will be blind apertures, so too, the Self can be
551
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
considered as the knower of everything, in everyone, at all
times, and in all places. This Omniscience of the Supreme
is vividly hinted at here, when Krishna declares, "I KNOW
THE BEINGS OF THE PAST, OF THE PRESENT, AND
OF THE FUTURE."
It must be noted that the Eternal Self is not only the
Awareness that lights up all bosoms at this present
moment, but it was the awareness that illumined the
objects, feelings and thoughts in all bosoms from the
beginningless beginning of creation and it shall be the
same Principle behind every knower that knows anything
in all the future generations till the endless end of time!
Electricity revolves the fan; but the fan can never fan the
electricity! The gazer surveys the heavens through a
telescope, but the telescope can never survey the gazer!
The Conscious Principle vitalises the food-made mind and
intellect and makes them capable of feeling and thinking.
Without the Self dynamising them, they are incapable of
sense-perceptions; but neither the mind, nor the intellect,
can perceive, feel, or comprehend the Subjective Principle,
the Self. The Lord declares here that, though he knows
everything, at all times, in all places, He is known by none
at any place or at any time --- "BUT ME NONE KNOWS."
According to the strictest Vedantic philosophy, the Self is
not a "knower," just as in the strictest logic of thought it
would not be correct to say that the Sun "illumines" the
world. From our standpoint, contrasting with the hours of
552
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
night when things are not illumined, we may rightly
attribute the function of illuminating things during the
day to the 'principle of light' called the Sun. However,
from the standpoint of the Sun, which is ever brilliant,
there is no moment when he is not blessing the objects
with his shining touch. Therefore, it is as meaningless to
say that the Sun "illumines" the objects, as to say that "I am
too busy now-a-days breathing"!
'Knower-hood' is a status gained by Self when It functions
through the equipment of Maya; and the Self, that
functions in and through delusory Maya, is called the
God-principle, termed in the Vedantic literature as Ishwara.
Here Krishna is pictured by Vyasa as the divine
embodiment of Truth, and an Incarnation of the Self, and
therefore, it is perfectly right if He arrogates to Himself
the nature of Omniscience and declares Himself as "THE
KNOWER OF EVERYTHING IN ALL THE THREE
PERIODS OF TIME."
But unfortunately, an ego-centric mortal viewing the
universe through the pin-hole of his congested,
constricted and limited mind-and-intellect, fails to see the
harmonious rhythm in the macrocosm. He who can rip
open his own self-made bondages of ignorance and rise to
attune himself with the macrocosm, can certainly come to
experience the Krishna view-point. Anyone who
successfully comes to live thus in unison with the cosmic
mind, is the Krishna of that age and for ever thereafter.
553
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IF THE SELF IS THE ETERNAL KNOWER OF ALL
CONDITIONED-KNOWLEDGE, THEN, WHAT VEILS
THIS ESSENTIAL NATURE FROM OUR REALISATION?
LISTEN:
27. By the delusion of the pairs-of-opposites arising from desire
and aversion, O Bharata, all beings are subject to delusion at
birth, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .
A highly scientific and extremely subtle philosophical
truth has been suggested in this stanza. In his attempt to
explain why and how the ego-centric personality in man
fails to cognise His all-full nature, the Lord touches, by
implication, the very fundamentals discovered and
discussed by modern biologists in explaining the
evolution of organisms. The instinct of self-preservation is
the most powerful urge under which the individualised
ego tries to live its life of continuous change. This instinct
of preservation expresses itself in the intellectual zone as
binding desires for things that contribute to the
continuous welfare and well-being of the individual's
mundane existence.
When the impulse of desire, flowing from a bosom
towards an object of attachment, gets half-way bumped
upon an object or a being that stands between the bosom
that craves and the object-of-craving, the refracted desire-
thoughts express themselves as aversion (II-52, 53). In the
tug-of-war between these two forces of desire and
554
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
aversion, the hapless ego gets torn asunder and comes to
suffer the agonising pain of lynching tensions within.
Naturally, its mind-and-intellect become fully
preoccupied with its pursuits of the things of its desire,
and with its efforts at running away from the objects of its
aversion. Soon the ego-centric personality becomes
endlessly preoccupied, totally confused and completely
exhausted. The host of thought-disturbances that are
thereby created in the mental, and in the intellectual
zones, breed among themselves and add day by day to the
chaos within. The 'agitation' (Vikshepa) is that which veils
(Avarana) the Truth from the direct cognition of the
individual.
Therefore, the only way by which we can come to
rediscover our equipoise and tranquillity as the Eternal
Self, is to arrest, control and win over the agitations of the
mind. All spiritual practices in all religions of the world
are techniques --- either emotional, or intellectual or
physical --- that aim at bringing about at least one solitary
moment of perfect mental poise. Such a moment of poise
is the moment of perfect mental illumination, the
auspicious hour of Self-re-discovery and fulfilment of the
reunion.
But unfortunately, adds the Lord in a divinely pathetic
note, "ALL BEINGS FALLS INTO THIS DELUSION AT
THEIR VERY BIRTH." This is not a pessimistic submission
as to the sorrowful destiny of a man, to escape from which
he is incapacitated from birth. Unlike the Christ-religion,
555
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
our Krishna-religion does not conceive a man as "a child
of sin." The Master-optimist, the Teacher of Hope, the
Joyous Dancer of the Jamuna banks, is expressing here
only a philosophical truth, that the very birth of an
individual into a given embodiment, with its available
environment, is the tragedy that he himself had planned
out elaborately for the fulfilment of his own deep cravings
and secret desires.
To get out of these delusions and gain the right
knowledge constitutes the Sacred Goal of Life, and the
Geeta is the Song of the Self that enchants the erring souls
away from their confusions to the inviting fields of the
joyous Perfection.
TO SHOW THEN WHAT THE QUALIFICATION OF
THOSE WHO SEEK THE TRUTH ARE, THE
FOLLOWING IS GIVEN:
28. But those men of virtuous deeds whose sins have come to an
end, who are freed from the delusion of the pairs-of-opposites
and steadfast in vows, worship Me.
"MEN OF VIRTUOUS DEEDS," as a result of their actions,
"COME TO CLEANSE THEIR SINFUL NATURE" --- is a
declaration that needs to be correctly understood. Sin is
not the nature of man; according to Vedanta, it is only the
tarnish that has come to dim the brilliance of the Self, due
to an error of judgement in the individual. The craving of
556
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the mind-and-intellect, to live in subservience to the calls
and appetites of the grosser outer world, is the root-cause
for the negative values entertained by us, which
ultimately result in 'sins.' He is called a sinful-person in
whom his body makes the heaviest calls on his time and
attention. In such a person, the body becomes the
dominant partner, and it 'enslaves' the self. An extrovert
life --- a life spent in pursuing the satisfaction of his
sensuous desires, to comfort and console every one of his
paltry emotions --- is the way of the sinful.
Such a passionate animal-life leaves gross impressions
upon the mind and intellect. Impressions (vasanas) decide
the future flow of thoughts. As the thoughts, so the
actions, and the action deepen the vasanas.
To break this 'vasana-thought-action' chain which is now
digging the grave of the individual's peace and
tranquillity, it is advised that he start a new life of
meritorious actions. Merit (punya) is a contrast to sin (papa)
and therefore, it is constituted of actions, feelings and
thoughts, dedicated to the godly and the divine. All
introvert actions undertaken in the cognition of "THE
SELF I AM," would create in their wake new impressions.
In the long run, the patterns of sin that existed in the
bosom are wiped out and new divine designs are created
therein.
Such a prepared mind-intellect, from which almost all its
negativities have been rubbed off is "FREE FROM THE
557
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
DELUSION OF THE PAIRS-OF-OPPOSITES." It then
becomes an instrument that can, with a single-pointed
steadfastness and firm resolve, meditate upon the Self.
WHAT WOULD BE THE MOTIVE IN THE HEART OF
THOSE WHO ARE THUS MEDITATING UPON THE
SELF AFTER THEIR MINDS HAVE BEEN READJUSTED
BY LIVING THE LIFE-DIVINE? LISTEN:
29. Those who strive for liberation from old age and death,
taking refuge in Me --- They realise in full that BRAHMAN,
the whole knowledge of the Self and all action.
Those who thus strive diligently to cleanse their hearts of
their wrong tendencies and bring their minds so purified
for higher contemplation upon the Self, do so in order to
gain "FREEDOM FROM OLD AGE AND DEATH." But
the modern world is also striving to discover methods of
arresting death and avoiding old age. However, this
physical continuity of existence in the world is not the
goal that has been hinted at here in the Science of spiritual
evolution.
Birth, growth, disease, decay and death are the natural
modifications that come to every man, or being, living in a
given manifestation to the ripe old age of its full existence.
Such modifications as experiences of change are the
agonising sources of all pains in life. But for this change, a
complete and unbroken happiness could be our lot. The
558
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
attempt of a spiritual seeker, in his meditation upon the
Self, is to get over all his identifications with the realm of
change, and the entire province of change is indicated by
these two familiar terms "OLD AGE AND DEATH."
Such a true meditator, meditating upon the Self, comes to
realise his identity with the Conscious Principle in him,
the Self. The Self in the individual (Atman) is the Eternal
Truth, which is the Substratum for the whole universe
(Brahman). To realise the Self is to become Brahman, since
the Self in the individual is the One Self everywhere. This
non-duality of the Truth is implied here in this stanza
when it declares that "THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON
ME, THE SELF, COME TO 'KNOW BRAHMAN."
That the man of realisation is not therefore an impotent
fool in worldly transactions, has been clearly brought out
here, when Krishna says that the Perfected One not only
realises the All-pervading Self, but at once comprehends
"THE WORKING OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL FORCES
(ADHYATMA) IN HIM AND BECOMES PROFICIENT IN
ALL ACTIVITIES (KARMA)." It is very well realised by all
men of experience, that he alone can serve the world who
has a full and complete knowledge of the psychology of
the world, and also has a perfect control over his own
mind. A man of harmonious perfection is the fittest
instrument to sing the Song of Truth, and such an
individual must be the best integrated personality, smart
and efficient in all activities.
559
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
CONTINUING THE SAME IDEA AND EXPRESSING
HOW A MAN OF WISDOM IS A MAN OF ALL
KNOWLEDGE AND ALL EFFICIENCY, KRISHNA
DECLARES:
30. Those who know Me with the ADHIBHUTA (pertaining to
elements; the world-of-objects) , ADHIDAIVA (pertaining to
the gods; the sense-organs) and the ADHIYAJNA (pertaining
to the sacrifice; all perceptions) , even at the time of death,
steadfast in mind, know Me.
Not only that the man of realisation understands all the
vagaries of the mind and the nature of all activities, but he
also gains a perfect knowledge of the world-of-objects
(Adhibhuta), the secrets behind the workings of the sense-
organs, mind, and intellect (Adhidaiva), and the conditions
under which all perceptions --- physical, mental and
intellectual (Adhiyajna) can best take place.
The common idea that a man-of-God is an impractical
man, inefficient to live a successful life in the world, may
be true as far as a dedicated devotee of a particular god-
form, or a prophet, is concerned. The Upasaka is one who
is so fully engrossed with his emotions and thoughts,
dedicated to the Lord of his heart, that he has neither the
interest nor the capacity to know the ways of the world.
But the man-of-Perfection, as conceived by the Science of
Vedanta, is not only a man of experience in the realm of
Spirit, but he is also, at all times, on all occasions, under all
560
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
situations, a master of himself, and a dynamic force to be
reckoned with.
He essentially becomes the leader of the world, as he is a
master of his own mind, as well as the minds of the entire
living kingdom. To him, thereafter, everything becomes
clear, and such a Man-of-Perfection lives in the world as
God in his Knowledge of the worlds, both within and
without.
In short, the chapter closes with a total assertion that "HE
WHO KNOWS ME KNOWS EVERYTHING"; he is the
man who will guide the destinies of the world, not only in
his own times, but in the days to come, as Lord Krishna
Himself did.
These two closing stanzas of this chapter do not of
themselves explain all the terms used in them. They
represent a summary of the following chapter. In a Shastra
this is one of the traditional methods in the art of
connecting two consecutive chapters together. In the form
of mantras, these two stanzas indicate the contents and the
theme of the following chapter.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the seventh
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE
AND WISDOM
561
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Vedantic ideologies, preached in the Upanishads had
become, by the time of Vyasa, mere speculative narrations
of poetic perfection, divorced from the actualities of life.
The Hindus, thus estranged from the essential glory and
strength of their culture, were to be resurrected by
showing them the particular beauty and fire that lie
concealed in the philosophical speculations. In this
chapter, Krishna has emphasized and indicated beyond all
doubt, how Vedantic perfection can be achieved and lived
to the glory of the successful seeker and to the blessing of
the generation in which he lives. It is most appropriate,
therefore, that the chapter is entitled "THE YOGA OF
KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM."
Mere knowledge is of no particular use. Wisdom is the
glow that knowledge imparts to the individual. The
fulfilment of knowledge in an individual is possible only
when he becomes a Man-of-Wisdom. Knowledge can be
imparted, but Wisdom cannot be given. The philosophical
portion of all religions provides the knowledge, the
instructional section of all religions provides techniques
by which knowledge can be assimilated and digested into
the very texture of the devotees' inner lives, and thereby
every religion seeks to create Men-of-Wisdom, who have
fulfilled their lives, justified their religion, and blessed
their generation.
Om Om Om Om Om
562
