Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Arjuna said: 1. Renunciation-of-actions, O Krishna, You praise
and again YOGA --- performance-of-actions. Tell me
conclusively that which is the better of the two.
It is evident that Arjuna has unconsciously walked out of
the neurotic confusions in his mind and has started taking
a lively intellectual interest in following the arguments of
his friend and beloved comrade. Action being in line with
his own nature, Arjuna very joyously and almost
instinctively accepts the Path of Action indicated by Lord
Krishna in the two previous chapters. Arjuna, however,
has not yet grown to be at complete rest with himself. To
him there seems to be a repeatedly jarring note in
Krishna's discourse, inasmuch as there is a constant
undertone, often very clear, in which Krishna insists that
renunciation of action is nobler and diviner than all Yajna-
ACTIONS. Hence this enquiry.
Moreover, a patient of hysteria, even when he comes out
of it, cannot immediately discover in himself a complete
self-confidence. This is generally experienced by
everybody. When the dreamer wakes up after a horrible
dream, it takes some time for him to compose himself
again to sleep. In the same manner, Arjuna, after the
shattering experience of his emotional neurosis expressed
in the opening stanzas of Chapter II, has not yet found his
own balance to develop complete self-confidence and feel
capable of discriminating and understanding rightly the
learned discourses of the Divine Charioteer. The Pandava
Prince concludes that Krishna is giving him a free choice
341
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
between two independent ways of living --- self-less
Action and renunciation of Action. He, therefore, requests
Krishna to indicate to him decisively one definite path of
self-perfection by which he can positively achieve his
spiritual fulfilment. This chapter is spent in indicating to
the children of the Vedas that these two are not two
identical factors to be chosen from, nor are they a
complementary pair of equal yoke-fellows.
Renunciation-of-action and full participation-in-action are
two different exercises to be practised serially and not
simultaneously. This theme is elaborated in this chapter.
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Renunciation of action and YOGA -
of-action both lead to the highest bliss; but of the two , YOGA -
of-action is superior to the renunciation-of-action.
From the very type of the question with which Arjuna
approached Krishna in the opening verse of this chapter,
the Lord understood the abject state of ignorance that
Arjuna was in. According to Arjuna, Karma Yoga and
Karma-Samnyasa-Yoga were two distinct paths which
would lead the practitioner to two different goals in life.
Man is essentially prone to be inert. If left to themselves,
the majority of men would demand in life only food to eat,
with the least amount of exertion and plenty of idle hours.
From this unproductive inertia, the first stage of man's
growth is his being awakened to activity, and this is most
easily and efficiently done when the individual's desires
342
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
are whipped up. Thus, in the first stage of his evolution,
desire-prompted activity takes man out of his mental and
intellectual inertia to vigorous activity.
In the second stage of his growth, he becomes tired of the
desire-motivated activities, and feels energetic when
advised to spend at least a few hours in a noble field, with
a spirit of dedication and service. Such activities are
generally undertaken in the service of others, where the
individual works with the least ego. The secret of working
in this spirit of self-dedication has been already described
in an earlier chapter. When an individual in this second
stage of self-development works with his ego subdued, in
a spirit of devotion and dedication, he comes to exhaust
his vasanas. Thus unloaded, his mind and intellect develop
the wings of meditation and become capable of taking
longer flights into the subtle realms of joy and peace.
The third stage of development is accomplished through
meditation, which will be discussed in Chapter VI. To
summarise, we may say that the spiritual processes of self-
evolution fall into three stages: (a) desire-prompted
activity, (b) self-less dedicated activity and (c) quiet
meditation. Of these, the first has already been described
in the earlier two chapters. The technique of meditation
will be described in the following chapter. Naturally
therefore, in this chapter, we are having a discussion on
how we can renounce the ego-motivated activities and
learn to take to selfless, dedicated activities.
343
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In this stanza Krishna explains that both activity and the
renunciation of activity can take the individual to the
highest goal. But he warns his disciple that of the two,
"participation-in-action" (karma) is any day superior to the
"renunciation-of-action" (karma-samnyasa). Here we must
understand that Krishna is not, in any sense of the term,
decrying renunciation as inferior to vigilant and vigorous
activity. To say so would be parading our ignorance, or at
least, a lack of understanding of what the Lord has said so
far, or the spirit in which he is continuing his discourses
hereafter. The Geeta is given out in the form of a
conversation between Krishna, the Immortal Teacher, and
a particular student facing a given problem and having
some definitely known mental weaknesses and
intellectual debilities, Arjuna. Essentially, here the
Pandava warrior is full of vasanas and for their exhaustion
he has to act in the battlefield. To those of us who are
psychologically in the state of Arjuna --- and almost all of
us are in that condition, suffering from the Arjuna-disease
--- the treatment is activity with the least conscious
selfishness. The advice given here that the "performance-
of-action" is nobler than the "renunciation-of-action" is
therefore to be very carefully understood.
WHO SO?... IT IS SAID:
3. He should be known as a perpetual SAMNYASI who neither
hates nor desires; for, free from the pairs-of-opposites, O
Mighty-armed, he is easily set free from bondage.
344
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Why "participation-in-work" is said to be easier for a
beginner than "renunciation-of-action" is explained here.
While defining a samnyasi, Krishna's revolutionary
statement cleanses the idea of renunciation from all its
external embellishments. He gives more importance to the
internal mental condition than to the external uniform.
According to the Lord, he is a samnyasi who "neither likes
nor dislikes."
Likes and dislikes, success and failure, joy and sorrow and
such other pairs-of-opposites are the wheels on which the
mind rolls forward earning the experiences of life. Our
intellect can register a situation or a condition only with
reference to the comparative estimate of its opposite.
Thus, I can understand light only with reference to my
knowledge of darkness. Comparison is the only way of
understanding given to man. If there is no contrast for a
thing, we cannot gain knowledge of that thing.
If comparison and contrast are the methods 'of knowing'
for the mind-and-intellect instrument, then, to renounce
them is to renounce the vehicle. A car is a vehicle that
moves on the earth. It cannot be used in water. Thus, if I
am sailing on the ocean, I am certainly not moving in the
car, but I am using a boat which floats on water. In the
field of plurality where comparison and contrast are
possible, I can use the vehicle of the intellect-and-mind.
The stanza here states that he is a true samnyasi, who has
gone beyond the perception of contrast, which necessarily
345
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
means that he is one who has transcended the inner
instrument of mind-and-intellect.
This is no easy task; to free oneself from the pairs of
opposites is to be free from all the limitations of mortal
existence among finite objects. By thus defining a
samnyasi, Krishna is not trying to paint a dreary picture of
hopelessness for the seekers. He has in mind the growth
and development of Arjuna. The Pandava Prince was then
having, in his intellect, thick vasana-coatings of heroic
instincts and kingly impulses for action. This stanza is
given in order to persuade him to keep away from a hasty
dash into samnyasa.
4. Children, not the wise, speak of SANKHYA (Knowledge)
and YOGA (YOGA -of-action) as distinct; he who is truly
established even in one, obtains the fruits of both.
Two methods are indicated for turning an ordinary act
into a divine action of dedication and worship. It can
either be done "by the renunciation of the concept of
agency in every action" or by "a consistent refusal to get
dissipated by our unintelligent preoccupation with our
anxieties for the fruits of our action." The former is called
the Sankhya method and the latter is called simple Karma
Yoga.
The Sankhya technique is not available to everyone, since
the "renunciation of agency" is not easy unless the
346
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
practitioner is highly intellectual and has in himself a
capacity to see the collective universe in action. Only
when we see the total logic of things, can we really come
to feel the insignificance of our individual ego in all our
achievements in our successes.
Here, the Lord insists that only undeveloped, childish
minds can find contradiction between these two methods,
while wise men who have lived either of the paths will
vouchsafe for the equal effectiveness of both of them.
Whether we practise the renunciation of our agency-idea
or live a life of detachment from the fruits of our actions,
if, as seekers, we are consistently persevering in our
chosen path, we shall come to the Goal, which is the same
whether we follow the one or the other of the Paths.
HOW CAN A MAN OBTAIN THE RESULTS OF BOTH,
BY THE RIGHT OBSERVANCE OF ONLY ONE?... THE
ANSWER FOLLOWS:
5. That place which is reached by the SANKHYAS (JNANIS)
is also reached by the YOGINS (KARMA-YOGINS) . He
"sees, " who "sees " SANKHYA and YOGA as one.
Categorically, Lord Krishna insists herein that the goal
reached by the Sankhya-method is also readily reached by
the Karma-technique. He, who experiences this common
Goal of both paths, is the one who really understands the
Truth of the Vedas.
347
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here the word "seeing" (pashyati) is used in the scriptural
meaning of the term, and so does not indicate a mere
physical act of perception. In the Advaita philosophy,
Atman is not seen as anything other than the seer, but it is
the experience of the Seer himself BY the Seer himself. The
term "seeing" is used here only to confirm that the
experience of Reality could be as intimate and beyond all
doubts, as it would be, when we see any object with our
own eyes from very near.
In thus synthesising both Sankhya and Karma, it is not
meant that they together form an alloy; they both must be
practised serially. We can consider them as one and the
same inasmuch as Karma Yoga purifies the Intellect and
gives a greater poise for meditation (Sankhya) through
which alone is the final experience achieved. Thus a
combination of these two is possible serially and not
simultaneously. This is to be very carefully noted by all
sincere students.
HOW IS IT THAT THE AIM OF KARMA YOGA IS
SAMNYASA? --- LISTEN:
6. But renunciation, O mighty-armed, is hard to attain without
YOGA; the YOGA -harmonised man of (steady) contemplation
quickly goes to BRAHMAN.
The Lord, with all the emphasis at his command, is
declaring, once and for all, the final conclusions that were
348
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
arrived at by the Immortal Sages of yore regarding the
place of right-action in Self re-discovery. Without
performance of action, the renunciation of action is
impossible; without having a thing we cannot renounce it;
to renounce life and the world, because one has sadly been
thwarted in one's hopes and ambitions, is not
renunciation.
In this sense, the polishing of the mind is a process very
similar to that by which we clean metal-ware by using
metal-polish. The item that is darkened by time is purified
by applying some polishing chemical on its surface. The
polish is the solvent of the oxide that is covering the
brilliance of the vessel. After a time, when we remove the
coating of the "polish," we find that not only is the
chemical-polish removed but the black oxide also is
removed, threreby leaving the vessel bright and attractive.
Similarly, the mind can be purified only by the process of
treating it with right action. When thus treated, the mind
gets purified from its vasana-blemishes and with such a
purified mind alone can we, during the deeper meditation
hours, come to renounce all activities. Before this
preparation, if we try to renounce activities, we may
remain physically inactive, but mentally very active.
Extrovertedness of the mind is not conducive to the inner
polishing. In fact, extrovertedness is the very mud that
sullies the Godly-beauty and strength of the mind.
349
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This is the greatest discovery that Hindu Masters made in
the ancient days, in the technique of Self-development and
Self-growth.
While mental purity and meditative power cannot be
gained without performance of right action with the right
mental attitude, Sri Krishna gives a positive assurance
here that such a conducive mental quality can be created
by right actions undertaken by the seekers.
Yoga Yuktah --- One who is well established in the path of
selfless and unattached activities, soon develops the
qualities of poise and single-pointedness of mind. Karma
fulfils itself in making the Yogin fit for continuous and
fruitful meditation, and when such an individual who has
practised the Path of Karma diligently --- either through
the renunciation of his sense of agency or through
detachment from all his over-anxious preoccupations with
the fruits of his actions --- such a meditator (Muni) soon
attains the Supreme experience of the Self in himself.
No definite time-limit can be fixed for declaring when
exactly the Supreme experience will come to a meditator.
The indecision regarding the time-element in this promise
of certainty is very well brought out by the term used, 'Na-
chirena' --- not long afterwards, meaning 'ere-long.'
With this knowledge in mind, when we read the stanza, it
becomes very clear why earlier (V-2) the Lord, in his
opening verse in this discourse, insisted that for Arjuna
350
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
'performance-of-action' is superior to the 'renunciation-of-
action.'
WHEN THE DEVOTEE RESORTS TO KARMA YOGA AS
A MEANS OF ATTAINING RIGHT KNOWLEDGE:
7. He who is devoted to the Path-of-action, whose mind is quite
pure, who has conquered the self, who has subdued his senses,
who realises his Self as the Self in all beings, though acting, is
not tainted.
In the previous verse, it was said in a sweeping
generalisation, that he who pursues Karma Yoga along
with meditation, will ere-long reach the State of Perfection
in his own personal experience. Here, in this verse,
Krishna is trying to give us the logic of the state of inward
revolution that will take place when we make the
pilgrimage to the Infinite in us, from our own present
state of finitude and bondage.
With scientific thoroughness and logical precision, all the
different stages of development and change that take
place in an individual through Karma Yoga are
enumerated here. He who is well-established in Karma
Yoga, accomplishes purification of his intellect. Any
purification in the subtle body, means a better state of
quietude within. The lesser the agitations caused in us by
our desires or emotions, the purer are we considered by
Vedanta. Through action, when it is selfless and without
351
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
anxiety for the fruits, the practitioner exhausts his existing
vasanas. When the inner equipment is swept clean of its
desire-waves, it must, necessarily, become more and more
quiet and peaceful. When once the intellect is purified,
meaning, rendered immune to desire-disturbances, the
mind, which reflects the condition of the intellect, cannot
have any disturbances. The sentimental and emotional life
of one who has controlled the flood-gates of desires,
automatically becomes tame and equanimous.
When, through Karma Yoga, a man has gained inward
peace, both at his mental and at his intellectual levels, it
becomes child's play for him to deny and to restrain, to
control and to guide his sense organs and their never
ending appetites. A seeker (Yogi), who has thus controlled
his body, mind and intellect, is best fitted for the highest
meditation. In fact, all obstacles in meditation are nothing
other than the mile-stones of sensuous appetites,
emotional agitations and desire-problems. Once these
chains are snapped, he comes to the natural condition of
deep meditation, wherein the re-discovery of the Self must
be instantaneous and complete.
This realisation of the Self cannot be partial; it is not
realisation, if the meditator understands only himself to be
Divine. To the realised, Divinity or the Self is Infinite and
All-pervading. From the innermost sanctum of the Spirit
when he looks out, he realises nothing but Divinity-
everywhere, in everyone, at all times. Therefore, the Lord
352
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
says, such a person "realises his own Self as the Self in all
beings."
When a wave has realised its true nature to be the ocean,
in its true ocean-vision, there cannot ever be any other
wave which is other than the ocean-essence.
When an individual, who has thus, through a total inner
revolution, come to realise his essential Infinite Divinity,
acts thereafter in his Atmic-consciousness, his actions
cannot leave any reactions upon him. Reactions of actions
can be claimed and arrogated only by the ego, and since,
after God-realisation there is no sense of ego left in the
God-man's bosom, his actions can thereafter leave no
impression upon him. Like a signature upon running
waters, nothing can ever stay in him to leave behind a
vasana.
On the whole, the theory of Karma Yoga propounded by
Krishna has been consistently kept up by the Lord in all
his declarations; but often it is conceived beautifully in the
suggestive fragrance of his words. In the stanza under
discussion also, it has been amply brought out that ego-
centric activities, motivated by desires, alone can create
vasana-granulations upon the intellect, and consequently
dim its discriminative awareness to know, to feel and to
experience the Eternal Divinity, which is the essential
nature of man as a spiritual being.
353
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IN THIS CONSCIOUSNESS OF UNIVERSALITY AND
SUPREME SENSE OF DIVINITY, WHEN A SAGE ACTS,
WHAT EXACTLY WILL BE HIS ATTITUDE IN LIFE?
8. "I do nothing at all, " thus would the harmonised knower of
Truth think seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, going,
sleeping, breathing,
9. Speaking, letting go, seizing, opening and closing the eyes ---
convinced that the senses move among the sense-objects.
Even such a perfect one is found to live, not sitting like a
stone-statue, but acting diligently, like any one else in the
world. A list of these common and natural activities is
indicated in these two stanzas: "SEEING, HEARING,
TOUCHING, SMELLING, EATING, GOING, SLEEPING,
BREATHING, SPEAKING, DROPPING, HOLDING,
WINKING," etc. In all these unavoidable activities of life,
it is explained here, a Sage or a prophet, living in the
world, will not have any egoistic vanity.
In deep-sleep we breathe, but we are not conscious of it at
all, since at that time, the ego in us is not functioning.
Similarly, when the ego has ended, all these activities take
place instinctively. Even while carrying on these activities,
the Seer has a constant awareness that "I DO NOTHING
AT ALL." This does not mean that a Perfect Master is an
irredeemable sleep-walker! The essential difference
354
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
between the two is, that the sleep-walker is unconscious,
while a Sage is ever conscious of the Consciousness.
That this attitude of total surrender of the sense of agency
can come only to a Perfect Master is very clearly indicated
here by the two terms "centered" or "steadfast," Yuktah
meaning, "centered in the Self." This Self-centered-ness
can be in two grades of intensity: one, indicating the self-
centeredness of a seeker who, through study, reflection
and meditation, tries to remain intellectually centered in
the Self; and another, the self-absorption of one who, after
the final realisation of the Self in himself, comes to live
vitally, at every moment, the experience of the Self
(Atmavit).
In order that we may come to withdraw ourselves from
the wrong conceptions of our own agency, we must have
a substitute 'Knowledge-bit' in ourselves, which will help
us in living the new experience. When I am ignorant of my
waking state-personality, I become victimised by my own
dream identity and this dream-identification ends only
when I re discover my real waking-state-personality and
come to live in the unbroken awareness of "I am the
waker." Similarly, in order to maintain in myself the
attitude "I am not the actor," it is necessary that I must
have another positive assumption to replace this negative
false belief. This is indicated in the last line of the stanza
that a man of perfection, living in unison with the Truth, is
ever an observer of the varieties of his own actions that are
355
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
executed by the various layers of matter in him among the
world-of-objects.
Just as the ocean, were it conscious, could watch and
observe its own waves rising and setting upon its own
surface, declaring its own glory, so too, from the infinite
depths of his own personality, the Master watches the
actions performed by the various layers of matter in him.
As I am typing these lines, I can watch my own fingers
typing and the more detached I grow, the more
entertaining becomes the play of the fingers on the
keyboard. Similarly, a Sage can, once having entered the
innermost sanctum of his Self, ever afterwards watch the
inert matter entities in him getting thrilled with activity in
a thousand channels of independent pre-occupations. He
is unconcerned; he is unperturbed; from the bottomless
depths of his own Being he watches on, in perfect
detachment born of his realised knowledge, and he is ever
confident that "I DO NOTHING AT ALL." BUT, WHAT
SHOULD BE THE ATTITUDE OF A MAN WHO IS NOT
A TRUTH-KNOWER AND IS ENGAGED IN ACTION?
10. He who does actions, offering them to BRAHMAN,
abandoning attachment, is not tainted by sin, just as a lotus leaf
remains unaffected by the water on it.
What has been said in the previous stanza may be true for
those rare few who have realised the Truth and are
revelling in God-consciousness. But the strange life-of-
356
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
detachment by which we can renounce completely the
sense of agency, is not available for all of us. We are but
aspirants and seekers of this Perfection. The way in which
we can train ourselves to renounce the sense of agency
will be the problem of all true students of the Geeta who
want to LIVE the Geeta rather than talk about its ideas. In
this stanza we have a prescription by which every one of
us can come to live the life of intelligent detachment in
life.
RESIGNING TO BRAHMAN --- Total detachment is
impossible for the human mind and that is exactly what
spiritual seekers often fail to understand. As long as there
is a mind it has to attach itself to something. Therefore,
detachment from the false can be successful only when we
attach ourselves to the Real. This psychological fact is
scientifically enunciated in this stanza, wherein Lord
Krishna advises the seeker to surrender all his
attachments to Brahman and continue striving on. To
remember constantly an ideal, is to become more and
more attuned to the perfections of the ideal. In order that
we may surrender all our sense of agency in our actions to
Brahman, we have to remember this concept of Truth as
often as we now remember our limited ego. When the
frequency of our thoughts upon the Lord becomes as high
as the frequency with which we now remember the ego-
idea, we shall come to realise the Brahman-ideal as
intimately as we now know our own ego.
357
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In short, to-day we are "EGO-REALISED SOULS"; the
Geeta's call to man is to become "SOUL-REALISED
EGOS."
Once our Real Nature is realised, the actions of the body,
mind and intellect can no more leave any impression
upon the Self. Merits and demerits belong to the ego and
never to the Atman. The imperfections of my reflections in
a mirror cannot be my imperfections, but can only be
because of the distortions in the reflecting surface. The
reflection may look shortened or lengthened according to
the type of the mirror into which I am looking. Similarly,
the ego comes to suffer the perfect and the imperfect
reactions of its own actions.
Having thus realised the Self, to remain in the matter-
envelopments and their world of objects, is to remain ever
perfectly detached "as the lotus leaf in the water." Though
the lotus leaf exists ONLY in water, draws its nourishment
from the very water and dies away in the same water, yet,
during its life as a leaf, it does not allow itself to be
moistened by water. Similarly, a saint in the world, as a
matter-entity, draws the nourishment for his individual
existence from the world of objects but ever remains
perfectly detached from his own merits and demerits,
from his own concepts of beauty and ugliness, from his
own likes and dislikes in the outside world.
Of the two methods by which ordinary Karma can be
transformed into Karma-Yoga, we have here the technique
358
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of renouncing one's sense of agency in one's actions
exhaustively described. This is no strange theory; nor is it
a unique doctrine. At every moment, all around the world,
we see this enacted in a thousand ways. A doctor's
attachment to his wife makes him incapacitated to
perform an operation on her, although the same doctor,
on the same day, may perform the same operation upon
another patient, towards whom he has no self-deluding
attachment.
If man were to act as a representative of the Infinite and
the Eternal, he would discover in himself mightier
possibilities and greater effectiveness, which are all
wasted and squandered to-day by his mis-conception of
the finite-ego as himself.
BECAUSE OF THIS:
11. YOGIS, having abandoned attachment, perform actions
merely by the body, mind, intellect and senses, for the
purification of the self (ego) .
A Karma-YogiN's attempt is to keep himself within himself
--- as a detached but interested observer of all that is
happening around and within himself. When he thus
observes himself, from within himself, as a worker in any
given field, it becomes easy for him to see that all actions
belong to the above-mentioned instruments-of-action and
not to the detached OBSERVER in him. Here, however, he
359
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
must realise that the OBSERVER in himself is not the
Truth, but this OBSERVER is "Truth standing on the open
balcony of the intellect." Even while thus observing
ourselves in action, we are ever conscious of the very
OBSERVER in ourselves. "The Consciousness that
illumines the very OBSERVER, is the Spiritual-centre, the
Self," is the declaration of all Upanishads.
If thus, the Spiritual-centre itself is something beyond the
"observer," why should a Karma-Yogin practise this
technique of self-observation called in our Shastras the
"witness-attitude" (Sakshibhava)? This is answered at the
end of the verse when Bhagavan says, "for the purification
of the ego." By such a practice, the seeker will be entering
into the field of activity and pursuing the work without
the self-arrogating ego, thereby rendering himself
available for an easy and effective purgation of the
existing vasana-impurities. To the degree these are
removed, to that degree the inner equipments become
clearer and steadier, rendering the reflection of the Divine-
Consciousness in them more and more vivid.
ALSO BECAUSE OF THE FOLLOWING FACT THE
KARMA-YOGINS PRACTISE WORK WITH
DETACHMENT:
12. The united one (the well-poised or the harmonised) , having
abandoned the fruit of action, attains Eternal Peace; the non-
360
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
united (the unsteady or the unbalanced) , impelled by desire and
attached to the fruit, is bound.
Through right actions, undertaken without any self-
dissipating anxiety for the fruits of those actions, a Karma-
Yogin can reach an indescribable peace, arising out of the
sense of steadfastness within him. Peace is not a product
manufactured by any economic condition or cooked up by
any political set-up. It cannot be ordered by constitution-
making bodies or international assemblies. It is the mental
condition in the bosom of the individual when his inner
world is not agitated by any mad storms of disturbing
thoughts. Peace is an unbroken sense of joy and it is the
fragrance of an integrated personality. That, this can be
brought about through selfless actions undertaken in a
spirit of Yajna, is the revolutionising theory given here.
When the worker is "ESTABLISHED IN HIS
RENUNCIATION OF THE EGOISTIC SENSE OF
AGENCY" and when he has "RENOUNCED HIS EGO-
CENTRIC DESIRES FOR THE FRUITS OF HIS
ACTIONS," he soon becomes integrated and comes to
experience the peace of steadfastness.
Not satisfied by this positive assertion, the Lord is re-
emphasising this very same philosophical truth in the
language of negation. He says that when one is not
ESTABLISHED (Ayuktah) in the renunciation of "agency,"
and because of his desires, gets himself tied down to some
expected results of his actions, he gets bound and
persecuted by the reactions of his own actions. Some
361
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
medicines, which, in small doses can give a complete cure,
can also spell death in larger doses --- for example, the
sleeping tablets. An instrument by which we can defend
ourselves can itself be the instrument for our own suicide.
In the same way, when we work in the outer field
unintelligently, instead of gaining a greater glow of
satisfaction and joy within, we will get ourselves more
and more bound, and hurled down into bottomless
darkness. The cause for this has been beautifully
explained by Sri Krishna. Due to desires for specific fruits,
we are mentally attached to those wished-for patterns to
be fulfilled in future. This is compelling life to patternise
itself to our will at a future moment; if a frog were to
imitate a bull and grow to the bull's size, it would end in a
tragedy; a mortal finite mind ordering a pattern for a
future period of time, is in no way better equipped than
the frog that tries to expand to the size of a bull.
BUT AS TO THE MAN WHO SEES THE SUPREME
BEING:
13. Mentally renouncing all actions and fully self-controlled,
the "embodied" one rests happily in the nine-gate city, neither
acting nor causing others (body and senses) to act.
Samnyasa is not a mere physical escapism but a mental
withdrawal from things that are unintelligent and
thoughtless. It is a mental attitude and not an external
362
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
symbol. Therefore, he who is a self-controlled individual
and who has brought all his sense-appetities under perfect
control, and renounced all his ego-centric and desire-
prompted actions, comes to experience and live in a
nameless joy, contentment and peace which well up from
the very depths within him. He thus remains contented
and happy, in the "City-of-nine-gates."
This is a famous metaphor used in the Upanishads, to
indicate the physical body of the seeker. The body is
considered a fortress city, having nine main gates, which
are the nine apertures in the physical structure, seven of
them on the face (two eyes, two nostrils, two ears and one
mouth) and the two apertures on the trunk, the genital
organ and the excretory organ. Without these nine holes
or at least a majority of them, life within the body is
impossible. Just as the King, remaining in the fortress,
rules over his kingdom through his ministers, giving them
the encouragement, strength and sanction by his mere
presence, so too, the Atman, within the physical structure,
though Itself doing nothing, by Its mere presence, vitalises
the various instruments of cognition and action, within
and without and governs the "life" in them all.
This famous metaphor is used here by Sri Krishna, and he
says that a self-controlled man lives within the physical
body, a nameless joy of pure Divine life, ever watching
over the activities of the matter-envelopments around
him!! Such an individual, ever identifying with the Self,
observes-on, unaffected, unattached and without
363
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
agitations, all the thrilled activities in the layers of matter,
but "neither does he act nor does he cause others to act."
MOREOVER:
14. Neither agency nor actions does the Lord create for the
world, nor union with the fruits of actions. But it is Nature that
acts.
In the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, God is the Supreme
Intelligence, ever dynamic and potent, who observes and
watches over all our actions, and who, with perfect justice
dispenses to each his reward for all his actions. Here,
however, the Lord, the Creator, is described not so much
as what HE IS as what HIS RELATIONSHIP with the
Universe is.
The Supreme Self neither creates any sense of agency nor
does It sanction any action. The Supreme has no such
function as marrying every action to its correct fruits. In
this very assertion we can find how far the ordinary
commentators, who jump to the conclusion that this
passage is a description of the Vedic God-principle (Karma-
phala-data), are in the wrong. Any close student of the
Geeta can clearly see that there is an attempt on the part of
Krishna to indicate to Arjuna the function and nature of
the Self and Its relationship with the three bodies: the
physical, the mental and the causal.
364
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
If the Reality, the Self, has nothing to do with the above-
mentioned agency or their fruits, our life which is nothing
without them, must have no relationship at all with the
Self. And yet, where the Self is not there, existence and
activities are not possible. Therefore, there must be some
relationship between the Self and the non-Self and here
this strange "CONTACTLESS-CONTACT" is being
explained.
It is very well-known that my nose is a permanent fixture
on my face. It has neither a voluntary nor an involuntary
movement. And yet, the other day, when I was looking
into a basin of water, I saw my nose and ears moving
rhythmically sideways as though upon well-oiled-hinges!
Even when I saw it, I knew that my nose was not moving;
but, all the same, I saw what I saw. Because my reflection
in the water depended entirely upon the reflecting
surface, it gathered unto itself its abnormalities from the
vagaries of the reflecting medium. The Self or the Atman
has neither activities nor an agency, and yet when in this
life I function through the equipments that are natural to
me, the conditioned Self, the ego, gathers unto itself these
peculiarities of agency, actions and anxieties for their
fruits.
Electricity in itself is static energy. But when it is
generated, stored and sent out through the distribution
system, and when it reaches the terminals in my room and
I plug on to it the various equipments, the same energy
becomes dynamic. When the Self, pregnant with all
365
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
potentialities, functions through the matter-conditionings,
It assumes to Itself the ego-centric attitudes of agency,
action, fruits, etc.
The ENJOYER of the fruits and the PERFORMER of
actions in us is the ego and not the Atman. I do not shake
or shiver but my reflection can be shaken when the
reflecting medium is disturbed. The Atman becomes the
performer, etc., only when It gets conditioned by
"Swabhava" --- Nature, or "Maya," "THE DIVINE Maya
MADE UP OF THE THREE gunas," as the Lord Himself
calls it.
IN REALITY HOWEVER, THE LORD IN HIS ABSOLUTE
NATURE IS EVER-UNINVOLVED:
15. The Lord takes neither the demerit not even the merit of any;
knowledge is enveloped by ignorance, thereby beings are
deluded.
The Supreme, who is All-pervading (Vibhuh), contrary to
all our Pauranic concepts of stock-taking gods and deities,
is declared here as not taking any note of the merit or the
demerit of the living creatures. It is such passages that
shock the story-reading devotee-class, and therefore, they
generally ignore the Geeta and read instead the glories of
Krishna. The concept that God sits just over the clouds,
peeping down and observing every sin and merit of all the
people all over the world, and that He keeps a perfect
366
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
account of all these so that on the Day of Judgement each
one will approach the Father who will pass the judgement
--- is a concept which can appeal only to simple folk in
whom the intellect is the least developed faculty!
The Eternal-Principle underlying life's activities cannot be
conceived of as taking any active note or interest in the
created or in the finite. From the Infinite standpoint, the
finite exists not. It is only when the Supreme functions
through Self-forgetfulness that It comes to see Itself split
up into the concepts of agent, action, fruit, etc. Sunlight
passing through a plane glass, in spite of the medium
through which it has passed, emerges in its pure nature, if
the glass be clean, flawless and colourless. If, on the other
hand, a pencil of light were to pass through a glass prism,
we all know that it would emerge in its seven component
colours, constituting the spectrum. Similarly, the Self
passing through Knowledge (Jnana) emerges as Self,
which is the One-without-a-second, All-pervading, All-
perfect. But the same Self, when It passes through
ignorance --- meaning, the body, mind and intellect --- It
splits up into the endless world of plurality.
The relationship between Knowledge and Ignorance is
very beautifully explained here. Ignorance cannot be
Knowledge, nor can Knowledge be a part of Ignorance.
Where Ignorance is, there Knowledge cannot be. Where
Knowledge has come, Ignorance must depart. But here,
we are told "KNOWLEDGE IS ENVELOPED BY
IGNORANCE," just as a solitary light in a dark jungle,
367
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seen from a distance can be described as a light encaged in
darkness. This relationship and the method of stripping
Knowledge naked, is more elaborately indicated in the
following stanza.
THE UNVEILING OF TRUTH IS A PROCESS OF THE
REMOVAL OF IGNORANCE AND NOT A CREATION
OF KNOWLEDGE, AND THEREFORE, IT IS ONLY AN
ACT OF RE-DISCOVERY AND NOT A CREATIVE
ACHIEVEMENT. THIS IS AMPLY BROUGHT OUT BY
VYASA'S WORDS IN THE FOLLOWING:
16. But to those whose ignorance is destroyed by the Knowledge
of the Self, like the sun, to them Knowledge reveals the Supreme
(BRAHMAN) .
In the case of finite mortals, sighing and sobbing in
ignorance, the Self is screened off from them by lifeless
walls of nescience (Avidya). The man of realisation is one
in whom Knowledge has lifted this veil of ignorance.
Darkness is removed by Light not by degrees but
instantaneously --- however old the darkness may be and
however thick its density. Similarly, in one who has
Knowledge (Jnana) of the Self, the beginningless ignorance
is lifted and within a lightning flash, his ignorance ends.
Ignorance creates the ego-centric concept and the ego
thrives in the body, mind and intellect. With the end of
ignorance, the ego too ends.
368
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
At this stage of Vedantic discussion, the dualists (Dwaitins)
generally feel like collapsing in sheer despair. they fail to
understand how the Self can be experienced when the
experiencer, the ego and the instruments of experiencing,
which are familiar to them in perception, feeling and
thinking, have all ended. Any intelligent student must
surely entertain this doubt. Foreseeing this possibility,
Krishna is here trying to explain how, when the ego has
ended, Knowledge becomes self-evident.
This explanation cannot be brought so easily within the
comprehension of a thinking intellect but by the example,
which the Lord gives in the second line: "LIKE THE SUN."
It is the experience of all of us that, during the monsoon,
we do not see the sun for days together, and we, in our
hasty conclusions, cry out "the sun has been covered by
clouds."
When we reconsider this statement, it is not very difficult
for us to understand that the sun cannot be covered by a
tiny bit of a cloud. Also, the region of the cloud is far
removed from the centre of the Universe where the sun, in
its infinite glory, revels as the one-without-a-second. The
minute humans observing from the surface of the globe
with their tiny eyes, experience that the glorious orb of the
sun is being veiled because of a wisp of cloud. Even a
mighty mountain can be veiled from our vision if we put
our tiny little finger very near our eyes!
369
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, the ego (Jiva) looking up to the Atman finds that
ignorance is enveloping the Infinite. This ignorance is not
in Truth, just as the clouds are never in the sun. The finite
ignorance is certainly a limited factor compared with the
infinitude of Reality. And yet, the mist of Self-
forgetfulness that hangs in the chambers of the heart gives
the ego the false notion that the Spiritual Reality is
enveloped by ignorance. When this ignorance is removed,
the Self becomes manifest, just as when the cloud has
moved away, the sun becomes manifest.
To see the sun, we need no other light; to experience the
Self we need no other experience. The Self IS Awareness.
It is Consciousness. To become conscious of
Consciousness, we need no separate consciousness; to
know knowledge we need no knowledge other than
Knowledge; Knowledge is the very faculty of knowing.
Similarly, when the ego rediscovers the Self, it becomes
the Self.
When a dreamer has ended his dream-career along with
his dream, he rediscovers himself to be the waker. The
waker is never known or understood or recognised as an
object by the dreamer. The dreamer himself transcends the
dream-world and enters the realm of waking, wherein he
knows himself to be the waker. In the same fashion, the
deluded ego, when it walks out of ignorance and enters
the realm of pure consciousness, it BECOMES the
Consciousness which is the Atman. This relationship
between the ego and the Atman, and the technique of
370
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
rediscovery of the Atman by the ego, are beautifully
described by this metaphor which is full of deep
significance --- for those who know how to chew upon it
in independent thinking. THE SAGE, WHOSE
INTELLECT IS ABSORBED IN TRUTH, WILL HAVE NO
MORE BIRTHS.
17. Intellect absorbed in that, their Self being That, established
in that, with That for their Supreme Goal, they go whence there
is no return, their sins dispelled by Knowledge.
With a deep study of the Reality, the seeker in all his
various personal identities, thereafter comes to live in
unison with that understanding of the Divinity. His
intellect gets, as it were, absorbed in That Knowledge and
his mind cannot but sing the song of Godliness through
everyone of its emotions. He becomes ever intent upon the
Infinite Bliss which he has come to recognise as the
essence in him. to such an individual the very Goal is
nothing but the Self, which he has understood as
illimitable and unlimited.
An individual who has thus educated himself upon the
World-of-Truth within himself, shall thereafter, have no
reason or chance to get caught up again in this world of
likes and dislikes. This is the result of full
PARTICIPATION in the studies. The next stage is to live
up to what is understood from the studies; the active
371
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
INVOLVEMENT in spiritual life. Then comes complete
COMMITMENT.
How can we say that the ego will not rise again in such a
man's bosom? The reason is indicated here, when Krishna
qualifies such men as "THOSE WHOSE IMPURITIES
HAVE BEEN SHAKEN OFF BY KNOWLEDGE." The
impurities mentioned here are the vasanas which are the
very materials with which the ego is conjured up. These
vasanas together constitute what we philosophically call:
"the ignorance of Spiritual Divinity." The antidote for
ignorance is Knowledge. Thus, when, with the rise of the
Knowledge of Spiritual Bliss, the dreary darkness of
ignorance ends, the ego too comes to a total extinction
from which it cannot re-start its career. Without a cause no
effect is ever possible. In short, in this stanza, we are
meeting the most optimistic philosophy in the world,
declaring courageously that, Self-Realisation is the final
experience in the pilgrimage of evolution, and that, in it,
the evolver in us shall come to fulfil himself. God-
realisation is the last stage of growth, and thereafter, to be
the 'Supreme' is the goal of all evolutionary struggles, to
achieve which, the ego, in its self-evolution, roamed about
so long in the field of its own self-created world-of-
finitude and imperfections!
HOW DO THOSE WISE MEN, WHOSE IGNORANCE OF
THE SELF HAS BEEN REMOVED BY KNOWLEDGE,
SEE TRUTH? --- IT IS SAID:
372
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
18. Sages look with an equal eye upon a BRAHMANA
endowed with learning and humility, on a cow, on an elephant,
and even on a dog and an outcaste.
The wise cannot but see and recognise the same presence
of Divinity everywhere. The ocean has no difference in
feeling for different waves. Gold cannot recognise itself as
different in different pieces of ornaments. From the stand-
point of mud, all mud pots are the same. Similarly, an
egoless man, having recognised himself to be God, can
find in no way, any distinction in the outer world of
names and forms. The distinctions generally recognised,
are all the distinctions of the containers. Man to man, there
may be differences in form, shape and colour of the body,
or the nature of the mind or the subtlety of the intellect.
But as far as Life is concerned, It is the same everywhere,
at all times.
Therefore, it is said in this stanza, that the Self-realised
cast an equal eye on a Brahmana endowed with
scholarship coupled with humility, on a cow, on an
elephant, on a dog or on a pariah. Everywhere he realises
the presence of the same Truth, whatever be the container.
Equal vision is the hall-mark of Realisation. The perfected
cannot make distinctions based upon likes and dislikes. In
and through all forms and situations, he sees the
expressions of the same dynamic Truth which he
experiences as his own Self.
373
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Shankara, in his commentary on this stanza, quotes
Goutama-Smriti which says that it is not only sinful if we
do not respect those whom we must respect, but it is
equally sinful if we respect those whom we should not
respect. Thus, from the standpoint of this Smriti's
declaration, to respect the dog as much as the Brahmana or
to respect a Brahmana only as much as we generally
respect a dog, would both be sin indeed. In order to show
that it is not so, the following stanza is given.
THESE ARE NOT SINFUL, FOR:
19. Even here (in this world) , birth (everything) is overcome by
those whose minds rest in equality; BRAHMAN is spotless
indeed and equal; therefore they are established in BRAHMAN.
In this stanza, almost a whole Scripture is indicated. In the
context of the development of the theme, Lord Krishna
had to show, first of all, that the Perfection, described in
the previous few stanzas, is not a Godly idealism to be
experienced after death, in a specialised world beyond the
clouds, called the Heavens. Pauranic Hinduism and all
Semitic religions promise a Heaven as the glorious goal of
existence and spiritual effort. However, to an intelligent
man; this promise is nothing more than a charming
hallucination, and not a positive gain. Such a vague goal
cannot be sufficiently encouraging to coax out of an
intelligent man all his enthusiasm and sincerity.
374
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Contrary to this vague hope, here in Vedanta, the naked
truth is declared when Krishna repeats what the Rishis
had earlier asserted a thousand times. It is expressly
mentioned that the relative existence as a limited ego-
centre can be ended, and the imperfect individual can
realize himself to be the Infinite Godhead. This goal can be
reached not only at a post-mortem stage, but in this very
same life, here in this very body, among these very same
worldly objects, and one can live in the Consciousness of
God, evolving oneself from the immaturities of the
deluded ego-sense.
Who is capable of gaining this ascendency in himself?
What is the secret method by which this consummate self-
redemption can be effectively fulfilled? The assertion that
man can reach this goal in this very life is made in the first
line by a detailed description of how it can be executed
and practically lived. It is said that the one, "WHOSE
MIND RESTS IN EVENNESS," gains the Divine
tranquillity of a God-man.
Patanjali Yoga-Sutra also explains the same fact in different
words. Where the thought-flow, which creates unequal
and spasmodic mental fluctuations, is arrested, there the
mind ends. Where the mind ends, it being the equipment
through which Life expresses as a limited ego, this sense
of separative existence also ends. When the ego has ended,
the egocentric thraldom of samsara also ends. The ego,
thus undressed of its samsaric sorrows, rediscovers itself to
be nothing other than the Self Itself. Unless one comes to
375
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
this mental equipoise, one is not capable of experiencing
the Samattwam of the Sama-darshin described in the above
stanza.
"Such an individual who has conquered his mind and has
come to live in perfect equanimity, in all conditions of life,
in all its relationships, "Krishna vehemently asserts, "HE
INDEED RESTS IN Brahman." This may look rather
illogical at the first reading, and therefore, as an
explanation in a parenthetical clause, Krishna gives his
reasons for such a daring assertion; he says, "SINCE
Brahman IS EVEN AND EVER-PERFECT."
Brahman is homogeneous and All-pervading. Everything
happens IN IT, and yet, nothing happens TO IT. Thus, the
Truth remains changeless and ever the same, just as the
river-bed ever remains motionless, although the units of
water flowing in it are ever-changing. It is a quality of the
substratum to remain changeless; all manifestations and
super-impositions, by their very nature, must change. An
individual, in his identifications with his body, etc.,
becomes a changing factor, a victim of every passing
disturbance; but the substratum, the Self, ever remains the
same.
An individual who has discovered for himself a sufficient
amount of tranquillity in which nothing dares disturb him
anymore, is certainly one who has plumbed the depths
and touched the bottom. A reed on the waves will be
tossed up and down by the waves, but a light-house built
376
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
upon firm rocks always remains upright and changeless,
allowing even the stormy waves to exhaust their anger at
its feet. Krishna's argument is thus logically sound when
he declares that a mortal among us, who can maintain his
equanimity under all conditions as explained in the
foregoing stanzas, is indeed one who has contacted the
Divine and the Eternal in Himself, "HE INDEED RESTS
IN Brahman."
BECAUSE BRAHMAN, THE SELF, IS HOMOGENEOUS
AND WITHOUT BLEMISHES, THEREFORE:
20. Resting in BRAHMAN, with steady intellect and
undeluded, the knower of BRAHMAN neither rejoices on
obtaining what is pleasant, nor grieves on obtaining what is
unpleasant.
Just as an excellent artist working at his masterpiece on his
canvas would again and again approach his piece of art to
add more details with finer strokes to his picture, and
would again and again retreat from the canvas to gaze at
his art from a distance, so too here, the Lord is creating
with his chosen words the picture of the mental life of a
man of equipoise and perfection upon the canvas of man's
heart. He dedicates many stanzas in order that the picture
may clearly and vividly come into the recognition and
appreciation of even the ordinary, casual student. Here is
yet another stanza offered with a burning enthusiasm and
almost missionary zeal, so that Arjuna, the confused, may
377
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
come to gain a vivid picture of the Man-of-Perfection, who
is not a mere impotent stone idol on the Ganges-banks,
but a veritable dynamic factor that moulds and influences
his generation of fellow beings.
Ordinarily, man gets excited or becomes despondent, not
because of the happenings in the outer world, but because
of his individual contact with them. If any man dies in the
city, it is not tragedy to me, but when my father dies, it is
my calamity. This clearly proves that the death of a man,
in itself, cannot bring any disturbance to my mind, unless
my mind had already projected itself on its relationship to
the individual who has died. The Man-of-Perfection who
has won over his mind and has come to experience the
Infinite Self, can no more, therefore, "FEEL ANY JOY ON
RECEIVING WHAT IS PLEASANT, NOR GRIEVE ON
RECEIVING WHAT IS UNPLEASANT." It does not mean
that a Man-of-Perfection is a wooden doll or an iron
statue, incapable of reacting to the external things whether
they be pleasant or unpleasant. It only means that a man
of true inward culture, discovers in himself, in his own
wisdom, a balance and an equipoise, which cannot be
shattered very easily.
When a man of such super-human mental steadfastness is
analysed, we can easily discover that no condition or
circumstances in the outer world can ever gain an entry
into the inner precincts of his personality. His intellect
becomes steady, since it is not poisoned with the usual
ego-centric misconceptions. It is, in fact, very interesting to
378
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
note how the ideas arranged in this stanza, in their very
sequence, explain a wondrous truth. One who is
unaffected by the presence of things, good or bad, is the
one whose "INTELLECT IS STEADY," and the one whose
INTELLECT IS STEADY, is the "ONE IN WHOM ALL
DELUSIONS HAVE ENDED." A steady intellect from
which all delusions have dropped becomes the instrument
for "KNOWING Brahman" --- and the "one who knows
Brahman becomes Brahman," and therefore, comes to live
"ESTABLISHED IN THE BRAHMIC CONSCIOUSNESS
OF INFINITE BEATITUDE," a living God-man walking
upon the earth that is Olympus to him.
MOREOVER, RESTING IN BRAHMAN:
21. With the self unattached to external contacts, he finds
happiness in the Self; with the self engaged in the meditation of
BRAHMAN, he attains endless happiness.
The foregoing stanza might give to an unprepared
student, the idea that spiritual life is a static existence
where a baked, stony heart, vainly comes in contact with
the heart-throbs in the world of objects, and feels for itself
nothing but a monotonous equanimity. In that case a
majority of us, without much discussion, can take our hats
off and say "goodbye" to all spirituality immediately. For,
who can deny the fact that the world, as it is constituted
to-day, in spite of its imperfections, when it comes in
contact with our own inner world, however maladjusted
379
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the inner world may be, can and does give minute flashes
of joy? Why should I deny myself the brilliant flashes of
momentary joys in exchange for a steady stone-like,
impregnable monotony, call it equilibrium or equanimity,
peace or God-hood? By changing the name, the thing itself
is never changed!
This doubt is not a mere exaggeration. This is often heard
in the halls of Vedanta from the lips of all sincere seekers.
Any sensible seeker entering the halls of spiritual study
with his intellect bright and clear, should come to doubt
its efficacy and utility. No teacher can afford to ignore
answering these questions and re-assuring the students;
Krishna, as a professional teacher, is doing the same in
this stanza.
THE ONE WHO HAS GAINED COMPLETE
DETACHMENT FROM THE EXTERNAL OBJECTS,
REALISES THE BLISS THAT IS THE NATURE OF THE
SELF. Though the process of self-development is
essentially a process of detachment, this technique of
negation does not take us to an empty and purposeless
zero, but when we have negated all that is false, we come
to experience and live a total positivity. When the dreamer
has renounced all his contacts with the dream-world and
thrown away his dream personality, he does not become a
non-entity, but he re-discovers himself to be the more
vital, the more effective personality, the waker.
380
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Similarly, whenever contacts with the external world
through the media of the body, the mind and the intellect
are clipped off clean, we awaken in the meadows of God-
consciousness and come to live the joy that is the eternal
nature of the Self. A seeker having thus redeemed his own
mind and intellect from their preoccupations with the
external world, at least during his meditation, when he
comes to keep his HEART DEVOTED TO THE
MEDITATION OF Brahman, attains imperishable
happiness. Here the term "heart" is to be understood as a
collective name for the inner instruments of knowing and
experiencing.
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO HE SHOULD
WITHDRAW THE SENSES FROM THE EXTERNAL
WORLD-OF-OBJECTS:
22. The enjoyments that are born of contacts are only generators
of pain, for they have a beginning and an end. O son of Kunti,
the wise do not rejoice in them.
We, as seekers, try to detach ourselves from the external
contacts in order to enjoy the Infinite Bliss which is the
nature of the Self. Even an average intelligent man, if he
cares to investigate his own experiences with the outer
world, will discover, all by himself, that joy-hunting
among the finite objects is no profitable preoccupation.
The law of diminishing utility works in all our experiences
and the very thing that gave a certain unit of joy in the
381
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
beginning, itself soon becomes a stinking putrefying pit of
sorrow. The experiences with the first laddu and the
twenty-fifth laddu when you are not hungry, are a
practical demonstration of this fundamental truth, that
sensuous joys are doomed to pain from the very
beginning.
A sense-object can only be as beautiful and joyous as a
leprous whore, painted, powdered and dressed up to
smile at strangers in the dark alleys of a dilapidated
commercial town. Lord Krishna beautifully brings out this
idea, when he points out to Arjuna, how sense-objects and
their joys, being finite in nature, do not enchant a wise
man.
Man, if he is wise, is satisfied only with the Infinite. Finite
things can only torture us with hopes of getting a more
satisfactory joy, and whip us along the path of
sensuousness making us pant in sheer exhaustion,
hunting for a complete satisfaction --- from ditch to ditch,
from gutter to gutter. The chaster, the fuller, the Diviner
joy, is gained only
when we come to experience the Self as explained in the
previous stanza.
AND THERE IS ALSO A WICKED THING, AN ENEMY
ON THE PATH OF BLISS, A MOST DIFFICULT THING
TO DEAL WITH, THE SOURCE OF ALL EVIL, VERY
DIFFICULT TO WARD OFF. MIGHTY EFFORTS
382
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SHOULD BE MADE, SAYS THE LORD, TO REPEL THIS
ENEMY:
23. He who is able, while still here (in this world) to withstand,
before the liberation from the body (death) , the impulse born out
of desire and anger, he is a YOGIN , he is a happy man.
Krishna himself feels that his over-enthusiastic description
of the Perfect-man and his mental life may give to any
reader a despairing sense of impossibility or futility. No
one living the present life of agitations, can ever dare to
hope that such a perfect happiness is ever possible for a
mortal living upon this ever-spinning globe. If a
philosophy is only an idealism which has no contact with
the practical world, that philosophy is merely Utopian
poetry fit for entertaining a pleasant idea, but never
capable of making man a nobler being.
In order to remove that misunderstanding, Krishna, in this
stanza, gives the assurance that man is capable of living
that perfect joy in this VERY WORLD, if only he makes
the necessary adjustments in himself.
My great-grandfather was a great violinist. His violin was
preserved and worshipped in my house till now. I too
have gained now a preliminary nodding acquaintance
with music. Suddenly an idea struck me: "Why not take
my great-grandfather's instrument and play upon it and
thus become overnight a great musician?" If I play directly
383
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
upon that ancient and faithful instrument, I will be forced
to break it into pieces, for, that violin, in that condition,
cannot give me perfect music. It needs general cleaning
and dusting; perhaps, re-stringing and a lot of tuning up.
When these adjustments are made, then only can it
faithfully give out all the notes, implicitly obeying the
strokes of my bow and the ticklings of my finger. In the
same fashion, today, our mind and intellect, the
instruments of singing the song of Perfection, neglected
from beginningless time, need a lot of re-adjustments
before they can gurgle out their contents of laughter and
joy.
The technique of re-adjusting the inner-instruments is
beautifully summarised here by Lord Krishna. The very
brevity and simplicity of this verse are the obstacles to our
understanding its full import. The advice has a deceptive
look of simplicity. "WITHSTAND THE IMPULSE OF
DESIRE AND ANGER," then he is a Yogi, even while here,
before his death, the happy man. To a modern student of
Freud and others, soaked with the ideas of behaviourism
and such other modern superficialities of psychology, this
may look rather an unscientific expression of a crude
enthusiast. But when we analyse and try to grapple with
its full import and implication, we shall see that it contains
volumes of suggestions.
"Desire" is the avalanche of thoughts sweeping down from
the pinnacles of our intellect, along the valleys of our
heart, towards an object-of-desire in the outer world.
384
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When this avalanche of thought is barricaded on its sweep
by a substantial obstacle ere it reaches it destination, the
blast with which it shatters itself on that obstacle is called
"anger." It is these two types of thoughts that generally
agitate our bosom. The greater the desire with which we
ponder over an object, the greater shall be the anger
against any obstacle that comes between us and our
object-of-desire.
To one who has won over joy and grief, and who has
gained a certain amount of detachment from external
objects, desire for obtaining the pleasant or the unpleasant
is no emotion at all. Where there is no desire, hatred is an
unknown alien factor there. He who has gained over these
two impulses, powerful and almost irresistible as they are,
is he who can afford to live in this world of multiplicity
and imperfections as an independent solitary man of true
and steady happiness.
Thus Krishna assures Arjuna --- and through Arjuna all
others like us who will read and try to understand this
immortal scripture --- that man can live perfectly happily
even while in this form, among these very objects, in this
very world, during this very life, if only he, in his spiritual
evolution, learns to renounce his impulses of desire and
hatred.
WHAT SORT OF A MAN RESTING IN BRAHMAN,
ATTAINS BRAHMAN?... THE LORD SAYS:
385
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
24. He who is happy within, who rejoices within, who is
illuminated within, that YOGI attains Absolute Freedom or
MOKSHA, himself becomin g BRAHMAN.
From the above three stanzas it becomes clear that,
according to Krishna, none of the usual fields of joy and
happiness are visited by the man of perfection. Neither the
warmth of flesh, nor the thrills of emotions and the
ecstasies of thinking are available for him. Renouncing
them all and conquering both love and hatred, the Yogi, in
sheer transcendence, attains a realm of bliss, and Krishna
declares that such a man alone can be said to be really
happy.
It becomes very difficult to believe that a man in that
condition would feel any happiness at all. All instruments
of happiness have been rejected by him. There is no more
any field for him to gain joy or satisfaction. Renouncing all
food one cannot have any joy of eating.
Again, it is against the very logic and rhythm of life to say
that man will be satisfied by a mere emptiness, a dark
cave of total negation. Every living creature roams about
in all its available fields of activity seeking to gain and
achieve a greater fulfilment of joy. Even the state of
"complete absence of pain" --- though it is a platform of
relief --- is not the summit where an individual will feel
contented and fully satisfied.
386
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Under the above circumstances, it will be mere
exaggeration to believe Krishna's assertion in the previous
three stanzas. To avoid such a serious misunderstanding
among the students, the Lord is here trying to find out for
us the positive glow of assured Divinity when the ego
rediscovers itself to be the Self as it renounces all its
delusory preoccupations with the false and the fleeting.
The substantial and definite experience of solid bliss
enjoyed and lived by the Self, in the Self, as the Self, is
indicated here in this stanza.
The seeker, in his detachment, not only withdraws himself
from the world-of-objects outside, but also discovers in
himself an ampler sense of bliss and security. This inward
joy is not a rare flickering flash, but a constantly
experienced factor. Such a well-developed seeker striving
constantly on the path comes to discover a field of fruitful
'entertainment' and engaging 'recreation' in the brilliant
light of joyous satisfaction within himself.
To him his entire within is flooded with the Light of Pure
Consciousness. His heart is thereafter alit with the Glow
Divine.
Such an individual --- who has withdrawn himself
completely within, where he has learnt to enter at will and
court and live in It --- is the one who has come to KNOW
Brahman. In his realization of the Infinite he has come to
experience the
387
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Bliss of Brahman, the smokeless shrine of Truth.
MOREOVER:
25. Those RISHIS obtain Absolute Freedom or MOKSHA ---
whose sins have been destroyed, whose dualities are torn
asunder, who are self-controlled and intent on the welfare of all
beings.
When a man of meditation, striving diligently, with his
senses well under his control, comes to wash off all his
sinful mental impressions (which had been creating in
him the veiling of the Self behind an unending array of
doubts regarding the Reality), he gains the joy of the Self.
When his ignorance, which is nothing other than
agitations of the mind (Vikshepa) and the consequent
veiling of the Truth (Avarana), has been removed,
Knowledge of his Real Nature dawns in his bosom and he
re-discovers himself as the Self!
Having thus re-discovered the Self, having thus gained
the goal of all evolution, what would be the duties of such
an individual in this existence, till finally, with a cheerful
farewell, he drops his mortal coil down, to merge himself
with what he knows to be his own Self? The general
impression is that he will move about in the world like a
mad, walking, stone-statue --- that eats at least once a day,
a threat to society, a moving bundle of contagion and a
screaming pillar of despondency and despair. Such a
388
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
living death is not the goal indicated by the Vedas nor did
the Hindu Rishis ever try to carve out of a man, a walking
corpse!
Self-realisation is not a melancholy parade, crawling to a
pre-destined tomb, but it is a joyous ride to the Palace of
Truth, from which man has wandered away in his own
ignorance and confusion. A true prophet is one who lives,
consumed in an ever-reviving fire of love. He ceaselessly
strives to bring out the Self from the non-Self that is
veiling It, in all other forms around and about him. This is
indicated by the term "engaged in the good of all-beings."
This lokaseva becomes his recreation, his self-appointed
engagement. His body, mind and intellect are offered as
oblations into the sacred fires of activity and while
remaining at rest within himself, the Saint lives on, in an
unbroken Consciousness of the Divine, the Eternal.
MOREOVER:
26. Absolute Freedom (or BRAHMIC Bliss) exists on all sides
for those self-controlled ascetics, who are free from desire and
anger, who have controlled their thoughts and who have realised
the Self.
By the work of serving mankind --- the duties of
reinstating Godly life in the bosom of the Satanic Age, the
love in the heart that tries to redeem the prostitute or to
389
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
cure the leper, the joyful enthusiasm to light and guide
where darkness and blindness revel --- the Master is not
bartering away his chances to live as a God of gods even
in this world, here and now. Just as a doctor working
among the unhealthy and the suffering is not himself
contaminated by the diseases or the sorrows, so too a
master-mind working amongst the wretched and the
lustful, the passionate and the sensuous, the false and the
low, is not in any sense of the term touched, even by a
passing breeze, of the stink around him.
How this immunity is maintained and preserved by a man
of equipoise even amongst the temptations of the vicious
atmosphere is indicated here in this stanza. When a
sincere seeker has, through his own intelligent self-effort
and divine self-application, redeemed himself from the
secret charms of the ever murmuring hosts of sense-
appetites in himself --- when he has conquered the
instincts of lust and anger in him --- when he has thus
completely mastered all threats arising from within him
and those that come to him from without, such a sincere
pursuer of the Life Divine, when he has
known the Self, gains the Bliss of Perfection "BOTH HERE
AND HEREAFTER."
AND NOW, TO ENUNCIATE THE DHYANA YOGA,
THE NEAREST AND THE MOST EFFICIENT MEANS
TO RIGHT KNOWLEDGE, THE LORD TEACHES THE
390
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PATH OF MEDITATION IN THE FOLLOWING FEW
APHORISTIC VERSES:
27. Shutting out (all) external contacts and fixing the gaze (as
though) between the eye-brows, equalising the outgoing and
incoming breath moving within the nostrils,
28. With senses, mind and intellect (ever) controlled, having
liberation as his Supreme Goal, free from desire, fear and anger -
-- the sage is verily liberated for ever.
In these two aphoristic stanzas the Lord has hinted at the
summary of the entire following chapter. This is the
traditional style in Sanskrit text-books on Brahma-Vidya,
wherein each section is closed, often indicating the
following section.
The above verses give us a complete picture of the Man-
of-perfection and his purposeful life at all levels of his
existence. Students of Vedanta are ever anxious to live the
Perfection. They are not dreamers, content with flirting
with Utopian idealisms, but they are the most utilitarian,
practical men of the world, who want to live a more
purposeful, efficient and effective life in this world.
Therefore, they are not enamoured of mere ideas, however
noble they may be, unless those ideas can actually be lived
in life.
391
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
How to achieve the perfect mental equipoise which has
been indicated in the previous stanzas, should be the
question that must agitate the minds of all true seekers.
Here, as a summary, with lots of dots and dashes, Krishna
is giving the scheme of practice, by which every diligent
pursuer can gain a complete integration. These two
stanzas become rough notes to be enlarged and exhausted
with details and descriptions in the next chapter.
The external world-of-objects, it has already been said,
cannot by itself bring any disturbance to any one of us. It
is only when we are in contact with the world-of-objects
that we suffer the agitations in life. So long as we are
standing on the bank of a river or on the seashore, the
waves in the water cannot buffet us. It is only when we
are in contact with them that we will be tossed hither and
thither. Forms, sounds, tastes, smells and touches
constantly bring their objects to agitate the mind, but we
shall get agitated by them only when we are identifying
ourselves with our mental conditions. If we, therefore,
shut out the external object --- not by physical methods
such as plugging the ears, but by a discreet intellectual
detachment from our mental reactions to the external
world-of-objects --- we shall discover in ourselves, the
necessary tranquillity to start meditation.
It is a great mistake that seekers often take the foregoing
instruction too literally. They converge their eye-balls and
gaze towards the space between the eye-brows for the
purpose of meditation. This is an exaggeration, though it
392
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
faithfully follows the instructions laid down here. It is to
be understood, as Shankara says, "TO GAZE AS IT
WERE" towards the point between the two eye-brows. It is
psychologically very true that when we are looking "as it
were towards the brow," our gaze would be turned
upward at about forty-five degrees to the vertical
backbone. In that attitude of upward gaze, the human
mind is held uplifted and it becomes the right vehicle for
higher contemplation.
There is an intimate relationship between the rhythm of
the flow of breath in us and our own mental thought-
conditions. The more agitated the mind is, the more
spasmodic and uncertain becomes the rhythm of our
breathing. Therefore, the instructions here, which advise
us to control our breath-flow to make it "EVEN WITHIN
THE NOSTRILS" becomes a conducive physical practice
for coaxing the mind to a relatively quieter existence.
These instructions are all mainly physical adjustments for
creating a conducive mental atmosphere. In the following
stanza, the necessary adjustments to control the mental
and the intellectual sheaths are hinted at. The tireless
seeker is asked to control his sense appetites, mental
oscillations and intellectual storms by dedicating all his
outer and inner activities to the one great eternal goal of
reaching Perfection --- realizing the Self. As far as the
taming of the intellect is concerned, the advice given by
Krishna is that the seeker should "RENOUNCE DESIRES,
FEARS AND ANGER."
393
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In enumerating these three qualities, psychologically
speaking, Krishna has expounded an exhaustive theory of
self-development and inner growth. There is an intimate
relationship between these three: desire, fear and anger.
Desire, we had found earlier, is that pattern of thought in
which the mind runs constantly towards a given object
with an anxious expectation of procuring and possessing
it. Where there is desire, there we come to experience fear.
And it is very well known that when we desire a thing so
much as to live ever in the fear of losing it, maddening
anger can exhibit itself at any moment against any threat
of an obstacle between ourselves and our object-of-desire.
When these three emotions --- desire, fear and anger ---
are controlled, we have controlled almost all the mad
impulses of our intellect.
He who has thus freed himself from desire, fear and
anger, who has controlled his senses, mind and intellect,
in his all-consuming ambition for liberation, and who has
quietened the flow of his breath, such an individual could
remain in the contemplation of Truth, without contact
with the external world, his eyes fixed steadily and held in
an upward gaze. Krishna says: "such a man of meditation
is verily free for ever."
This assertion that such an individual "IS VERILY FREE
FOR EVER" is an anticipatory truth and not an
accomplished fact. In ordinary conversation, we use the
phrase "baking of bread," which, in its literal meaning is
false, since bread need not be baked; we bake only dough.
394
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
But in such usages, what we mean is that the goal is not
too far away from the particular act we are doing. Even
while boiling water, we say that we are making tea; the
idea is that tea-making cannot be far away when the water
has already been boiled. Similarly, here also, when we
have made all the above-mentioned adjustments, at all
levels of our existence, and when we sit in contemplation
of the Self, we become released from all our
misunderstandings and come to experience the freedom
of Godhood... ere long (achirena).
WHAT HAS HE, WHOSE MIND IS THUS STEADILY
BALANCED, TO KNOW AND MEDITATE UPON, IN
THE DHYANA YOGA?
29. Knowing Me as Enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities, the
Great Lord of all worlds, the friend of all beings, he attains
Peace.
HE ATTAINS PEACE ON KNOWING ME --- It is never to
be forgotten that, in the Geeta whenever Lord Krishna
uses the first person singular, he does not mean the mortal
framework of the son of Devaki, but indicates the Self in
the individual --- the Eternal Principle, Sri Krishna
Paramatman. The Self is the real vitality behind the ego
(Jiva) which functions in identification with the matter-
envelopments and feels that it is the doer and enjoyer. The
term "Yajna" has been already explained earlier. In its
Geeta implication, Yajna is the self-dedicated work which
395
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
one performs in any field of activity. "Tapas" means all
self-denial and practices of self-control which the ego
undertakes in order to integrate and revive its own
capacities to seek its real identity with the Eternal.
The Self is certainly the "Maheshwara" --- the Lord of all
lords, the God of all gods. Here the Ishwara is to be
understood as the controller of all fields of activities:
activities of perception and expression. Each one of them
is considered as presided over by various faculties, and
they are termed as devas, meaning "illuminators." The
faculty of seeing illumines the field of the eyes and thus
gives the knowledge of forms and colours; the faculty of
hearing illumines the field of the ears and thus provides
the knowledge of sound, and so on. The Self is in fact the
Lord of all these individual lords governing, controlling
and ruling over the various fields. Therefore, Lord
Krishna as the Self confers upon Himself the title of
"Sarva-Loka-Maheshwarah."
In our ordinary experiences in the world, a man who has
kingly powers is very difficult to approach, and the King
of kings, a personality striking awe and reverence in the
heart of the ordinary man, becomes almost
unapproachable to the ordinary people. Therefore, the
Lord has to qualify his title of "Sarva Loka Maheshwarah"
with the epithet that he is at the same time "A FRIEND OF
ALL LIVING CREATURES."
396
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The term "knowing" is not objectively knowing Krishna, in
the sense in which we come to know a flower or a fruit,
but here the term "knowing" is to be understood as
"realising." Spiritual experience is the realisation of the
Self to be the one great ruler within, who presides over all
the activities within the body-politic, who is the One, at
whose altar the perfection-seeking ego surrenders all its
spiritual activities, and as a tribute to Whom, the seeker
brings all his self-denial and asceticism.
"KNOWING HIM TO BE NONE OTHER THAN
KRISHNA, THE INDIVIDUAL REACHES THE GOAL OF
PEACE, THE ETERNAL SANCTUM OF PERFECTION."
Thus in the UPANISHAD of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, in
the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna the fifth discourse
ends entitled: YOGA OF TRUE RENUNCIATION.
Om Om Om Om Om
Chapter 6
397
