Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 9
Raja Vidya Raja Guhya Yoga
The Yoga of Royal Knowledge and Royal Secret
The Blessed Lord said: 1. To you who do not cavil, I shall now
declare this, the greatest secret, the most profound knowledge
combined with experience (or realisation) ; which having
known, you shall be free from the sorrows of life.
Lord Krishna has found, in Arjuna, one who is really
anxious to evolve. Only, he wanted help from some
quarter, to develop in himself an intellectual conviction
for the way-of-life he was to pursue. The Lord says that
He will declare the philosophy of Arjuna, "WHO DOES
NOT CARP OR CAVIL," and the benefit of this
knowledge and its practical application has also been
indicated in this stanza; "HAVING KNOWN WHICH,
YOU SHALL BE FREE FROM ALL LIMITATIONS OF
FINITE EXISTENCE."
An individual becomes incapable of facing the challenges
of life and meeting its rising demands, because, in his false
estimation of things and beings, he comes to play out of
tune with the whole orchestra of life. To understand
ourselves and the world outside, is to know the secret of
621
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
keeping a healthy and happy relationship with the world
outside. He, who is capable of tuning himself up thus with
the whole, is the one who is marked out for sure success
and complete victory in life.
Because of his internal maladjustments, we found Arjuna,
the hero of his age, behaving as a shattered personality.
Such an individual, split in himself, comes to feel the
problems of life too heavy, the duties of life too irksome,
and life itself too much to bear. All those, who thus allow
the engine of life to run over them and crush them down,
are termed as Samsarins. Those who know the art of self-
development can easily learn how to steer the engine of
existence from its driver's seat, safely around every
impediment, and they are the Men-of-Realisation, the
Saints, and the Sages. This status is the heritage of man ---
of every intelligent person, who has the enthusiasm and
the courage to master life and live like a God upon earth
ruling over the circumstances, and smiling at the
adversities.
TO GENERATE AN ALL-OUT ENTHUSIASM IN THE
ART OF LIVING, WHICH EACH STUDENT HAS TO
BRING ABOUT IN HIS OWN LIFE, THE ART OF SELF-
PERFECTION IS PRAISED IN THE FOLLOWING:
2. Royal Science, Royal Secret, the supreme purifier is this,
realisable by direct intuitive knowledge, according to the
DHARMA, very easy to perform, imperishable.
622
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Vedanta is no religion in the ordinary concept of the term,
which implies the formalistic observance of some physical
and mental discipline, in some House of God, during a
specific day of the week, for a prescribed length of time. If
we consider religion as an "Art of Right Action," then
Vedanta is indeed the noblest of religions, because it
provides a scientific explanation for the entire way of right
living. Krishna here glorifies it: "THIS IS THE ROYAL
SCIENCE, THE ROYAL MYSTERY, PURE AND VERY
HIGH."
Even if there be a Science, royal in its import, deep in its
profundity, and "supreme in its purifying effect," unless it
be available for our comprehension, it is almost useless.
Here, Krishna promises that it is "CLEARLY
COMPREHENSIBLE," since it can be apprehended
directly by an immediate experience of the Self.
Also it is a science "pertaining to Dharma" (Dharmyam).
The term Dharma has already been explained. Man is
nothing but a parcel of minerals in their gross and subtle
states, if the Conscious Principle were not blessing them
with awareness. This Awareness, called the Self, is then
the Dharma of man, the Principle of Life in him. the
Spiritual Science, that the Lord of Vrindavana promises to
enunciate in this chapter, is neither the physical science of
the biology of the objects of the world, nor the science of
psychology that explains the field of emotions and
thoughts --- but the Science of the Self, the deepest essence
in each individual.
623
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
VERY EASY TO PERFORM --- Religion is a subjective
technique to be pursued and accomplished by each in
himself. If this great science, into which Lord Krishna is
proposing to initiate Arjuna, is an extremely difficult
proposition in life, then, naturally, it is a futile philosophy.
The poverty of a country is not removed by the
declaration of its scientists that there are inexhaustible
quantities of unclaimed gold, awaiting free transportation,
on Mars! In order to remove this vague fear, it has been
fully confirmed that the technique of self-integration and
the ultimate gaining of complete mastery over oneself is
an art easy to master for the sincere and the diligent.
Even if it be easy, no intelligent man can pursue the path,
if the gain acquired thereby is perishable and temporary.
It is endorsed here that the gains acquired through a
faithful pursuit of this Royal Science of self-development
and self-mastery are "OF AN IMPERISHABLE NATURE."
To realise the Self is to become the Self, the Eternal, the
Infinite Reality behind the phenomenal world of
appearances.
AS A CONTRAST TO THOSE WHO ARE SEEKING, THE
DESTINY OF THOSE WHO ARE NOT SEEKING THE
IMPERISHABLE IS DECLARED TO BE THE DISTURBED
LIFE OF SAMSARA:
624
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
3. Persons without faith in this DHARMA (the Divine Self) ,
O Parantapa, without attaining Me, return to the path of
rebirth, fraught with death.
Those who live in complete disregard of the Self,
necessarily "RETURN WITHOUT ATTAINING ME." Men
of extroversion, meditating upon the sense objects and
bartering away their intellectual capacities, emotional
powers, and physical strength for seeking, acquiring and
possessing the implements to work out their sensual
satisfaction, must necessarily return to "THE PATH OF
REBIRTH, FRAUGHT WITH DEATH."
The more an individual meditates upon the finite, strives
to gain the changeable, and gets choked by the sorrows of
the perishable, the more he comes to worship and court
the lower nature of the Self, the Prakriti. However big the
ocean may be, a drop of it, taken from anywhere in its
infinite expanse, should taste saline. In the same way,
whatever be the motive behind the courting, once we
allow ourselves to be courtiers of the world-of-objects, we
are doomed to taste the saline tears of sorrow, because of
the very ephemeral nature of the "objects of our love."
The world of names and forms is finite and ever-changing.
At every moment, every object is living through a process
of change, and each change is death to the previous state
of existence of the object. Thus, the term "death" used here
by Krishna in his phrase "FRAUGHT WITH DEATH" is to
be understood in this liberal meaning of the term. In short,
625
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
courtiers of the finite reach the tragic realms of constant
death.
In the perfect Science of Vedanta, though Shraddha also
implies "faith" in the Tagorean sense of the term, it is not
built upon the misty vapours of emotionalism, but upon
the solid beams of intellectual understanding and perfect
awareness of the logic of thought behind the theory.
Shankara defines Shraddha as the "moulding of the life and
living, on the basis of right intellectual comprehension of
what the scripture indicates and the teachers explain." It is
the enduring faith that lifts us to realms beyond the reach
of the mind and intellect, and helps to carve out of the
mortal and the finite, the Immortal and the Infinite.
Something without which a substance cannot be that very
substance is called its Dharma or essence; e. g., heat in fire,
cold in ice. Those who have no faith in the Divine Essence,
which is the Self in them, get easily abducted by the
cooings of their emotions, or the barkings of their intellect,
or the whisperings of their flesh. They slip into devolution
and come to live as biped animals, when they lose their
faith in the Divine core which is the Essential Being. A
mad king, who has forgotten his own kingship, throws his
kingly dignity to the winds and runs about naked on the
streets, behaving as though he were a homeless vagabond.
Similarly, an individual, in his forgetfulness of the dignity
of his essential Self-hood, comes to live in the open streets
of sense pleasures, hunting for his satisfactions, as though
626
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
he were nothing better than a crawling worm in some
wayside ditch.
Simple-looking though it be, this stanza is pregnant with
untold suggestiveness. By contrasting thus the "Path-of-
Knowledge" with the "Path-of-Ignorance" in the most
vivid terms, Krishna brings to the comprehension of
Arjuna the advisability of the blessed path of Higher
seeking, the realisation of the Imperishable.
IN THE FOLLOWING, KNOWLEDGE IS THEREFORE
GLORIFIED, WHEN KRISHNA EXPLAINS THAT
DHARMA, WHICH IS TO BE FOLLOWED IS:
4. All this world is pervaded by Me in My Unmanifest form
(aspect) ; all beings exist in Me, but I do not dwell in them.
ALL THIS WORLD IS PERVADED BY ME IN MY
UNMANIFESTED FORM --- The subtlety of a thing is
measured in terms of its pervasiveness and therefore, the
Subtlest must necessarily be the All-pervasive. As all
limited things must have forms, the All-pervasive alone
can be Eternal and Infinite. All forms are perishable
substances (Dravya). Thus the Self, in its essential
Unmanifest nature, must be pervading everything, as the
mud pervades all forms and shapes in all mud-pots.
If thus, the Infinite pervades the finite, what exactly is the
relationship between them? Is it that the finite rose from
627
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Infinite? Or is it that the Infinite PRODUCED the
finite? Has the Infinite Itself become the finite, as a
modification of Itself, or do they both, among themselves,
keep a father-son, or a master-servant relationship?
Various religions of the world abound in such questions.
The dualists can afford to indulge in such a fancied
picture of some relation or other between the finite and
the Infinite. But the Adwaitins (Non-dualists) cannot accept
this idea, since to them the Eternal Self alone is the ONE
and the ONLY REALITY.
The second line of this stanza is a classical description of
this "relationless-relationship" between the Real and
unreal. "All beings exist in Me but I dwell not in them." To
a hasty reader this would strike as an incomprehensible
paradox expressed in a jumble of empty words. But to one
who has understood well the theory of super-imposition,
this is very simple. The ghost-vision can come only upon
the post. And what exactly is the relationship between the
ghost and the post from the standpoint of the post? The
innocent post, in infinite love for the deluded fool, can
only make a similar statement as the Lord has made here.
"The ghost," the post would say, "is no doubt, in me, but I
am not in the ghost; and therefore, I have never frightened
any deluded traveller at any time." In the same fashion the
Lord says here, "I, IN MY UNMANIFEST NATURE, AM
THE SUBSTRATUM FOR ALL THE MANIFESTED" chaos
of names and forms, but neither in their joys nor in their
sorrows, neither in their births nor in their deaths, "AM I
628
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SHARING THEIR DESTINIES, BECAUSE I DO NOT
DWELL IN THEM."
This line sounds a faithful echo of the same idea, perhaps
more crisply expressed earlier (VII-12), where it was said
"I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME." In short, it is
indicated here that the Self which, through Its
identification with the matter-envelopments, has come to
"DWELL IN THEM," is the pain-ridden mortal, while the
same Self which has successfully withdrawn all Its false
arrogations with the matter layers and has come to realise
that, "I DO NOT DWELL IN THEM" is the Self, Immortal
and Unmanifest.
THEN THERE MUST BE SOME SORT OF AN
EXISTENCE FOR THE FINITE IN THE INFINITE:
5. Nor do beings exist (in reality) in Me --- behold My Divine
YOGA supporting all beings, but not dwelling in them, am I
My Self, the 'efficient-cause' of all beings.
Continuing the strain of His arguments in the previous
stanza here He says, "NOR DO THINGS EXIST IN ME,"
although "I DWELL NOT IN THEM." Now here he says
that in the Infinite, never has the finite ever risen!
Continuing our example of the post and the ghost this is
equivalent to the post declaring that, "in me, the electric
post, never has a ghost existed." In Pure Awareness, in Its
Infinite Nature of sheer Knowledge, there never was,
629
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
never is and can never be any world of pluralistic
embodiment, just as, for the waker, the pleasures of the
dream world ARE NEVER AVAILABLE. In short, at the
time of the direct subjective experience of the Self there is
no cognition of the pluralistic world, which is born out of
the forgetfulness of the Infinite.
The Self "BRINGS FORTH AND SUPPORTS ALL
BEINGS" just as the ocean gives birth to, supports and
nourishes all the waves in it. "AND YET," says Krishna "I,
MYSELF NEVER DWELL IN THEM." Just in the same
way the ocean can cry that "I am never the waves." The
mud is the womb of all pots, the sustainer of their shapes,
the nourisher of their forms, and yet, none of the pots, nor
all the pots put together, can ever define or give a total
knowledge of the mud. Pure Consciousness, Divine and
Eternal, is the Substratum that sustains and illumines the
entire panorama of the everchanging plurality.
The objects of the world conveying their stimuli through
the doors of the sense organs create mental waves which
are illuminated by the Conscious Principle residing in all
forms. If the Awareness is not there, the external world
must necessarily fail in giving the mind-and-intellect the
concept of its life as a series of unbroken experiences. Just
as the cotton is in the cloth, or the gold in all ornaments, or
the heat in the fire, so too, the Imperishable is in the
perishable. The dreamer can function only in the waker;
the waker pervades the dream-experiences, and at the
630
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
same time, the waker is not in the dream nor in fact, when
awakened fully, does the dream ever exist in the waker.
KRISHNA FEELS THAT THE LANGUAGE OF
PARADOX IS PROVING TOO MUCH OF A RIDDLE TO
THE GROSS INTELLECT OF THE AVERAGE MAN IN
ARJUNA, AND THEREFORE, IN HIS DIVINE
KINDNESS, THE LORD PROVIDES FOR HIS DISCIPLE
AN EXAMPLE:
6. As the mighty wind, moving everywhere, rests always in
space (the AKASHA ) , even so, know you, all beings rest in
Me.
The confused Prince, trying to solve the riddle, is helped
here by the Kingly Teacher in Krishna who gives him a
vivid example. To imagine a substance that exists
everywhere, allowing everything to exist in it, but at the
same time, it in itself not getting conditioned by the things
that exist in it, is very difficult, and the ordinary intellect
cannot easily soar to comprehend those heights of
understanding and appreciation. As a prop for the
ordinary intellect, to raise itself up so that it may peep
over its own limitations and gain a vision of the
unravelling expanse of the Infinite, here is a brilliant
example.
The gross can never condition the subtle. As the poet
sings, "Stone walls do not a prison make," for, even
631
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
though we may imprison the body of the prisoner, his
thoughts are ever free to reach his kith and kin at their
hearth. The gross stone walls cannot limit the flight of the
subtle thoughts. If once this principle is well understood
the example becomes very expressive exhibiting all its
secret suggestions.
KNOW YOU ARJUNA, that the winds curl, swirl and
whirl around everywhere in space; the space supports and
envelopes them everywhere, and yet, they do not ever
limit the space. This beautiful example, when meditated
upon by any seeker, if he has at least an average amount
of intellectual comprehension, will enable him to define,
in his own mind, the right relationship that exists between
the Self and the non-Self. The Real supports the unreal; the
unreal seemingly lives... through its history of misery and
sorrows, fleeting joys and passing pleasures... in the Real
and yet, the unreal can never condition the Real. When the
wind is moving, the space need never move. None of the
qualities of the wind is the quality of the space (Akasha).
Compared with the outstretching Infinite space, in which
the universes keep on revolving, at a speed measured in
light years, the atmospheric disturbances are only upto the
height of a few miles off the surface of the globe. In the
infinite vastness of the Real, the arena of disturbances
caused by Its flirtations with Its own assumed self-
ignorance, is only a negligible area... and even there, the
relationship between the false and the Real is the
relationship between the fickle breeze and the Infinite
space.
632
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
These two are stanzas not merely to be explained away by
words, however true the commentator may be; they are to
be meditated upon by the students, individually.
THEN WHAT ABOUT YOUR WONDERFUL THEORY
OF A SYSTEMATIC LAW OF REBIRTH --- THE STORY
OF A CREATOR CREATING THE WORLD DURING HIS
DAY-TIME --- AND DISSOLVING THE ENTIRE LOT
DURING HIS NIGHT-TIME, ETC.?... LISTEN:
7. All beings, O Kaunteya (O Son of Kunti) , go into My
PRAKRITI (nature) at the end of a KALPA; I send them forth
again at the beginning of (the next) KALPA.
8. Animating My PRAKRITI, I, again and again send forth all
this helpless multitude of beings, by the force of nature
(PRAKRITI) .
The Eternal Brahman functioning through the equipment
of the total mind is the God-principle, the Creator, and the
same Absolute Brahman functioning through the limited
individual mind-and-intellect is the individualised Self,
the mortal ego (Samsarin). The same Sun gets reflected in
the clear still waters of a vast lake and in the disturbed
muddy pool on the roadside; the difference between the
two distinctive reflections, in the different equipments,
will explain the difference between the individual-ego and
the God-principle. Just as the Sun in the sky can rightly
say: "I am the cause for the brilliant reflection in the lake
633
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and the broken, dull reflection in the wayside puddle," so
too Krishna, the Self declares: "I am the vital animating
Reality behind the Creator, and also behind the created."
The Adjunct of the God-principle, the total body-mind-
intellect equipment, constitutes the lower nature of the
Self, called the Prakriti. At the beginning of a cycle the
existing vasanas in the lower nature get projected "and at
the end of the Kalpa all beings go to My Prakriti."
The act of invigorating or fertilising the Prakriti to grow
up again into the tree-of-Samsara, is an act of grace from
Brahman. If the Supreme Consciousness were not to
identify with Prakriti, (Maya), she, being inert in herself,
cannot project forth any life at all. The entire multitude of
vasanas, "I project again and again." When the Self
animates Prakriti, the vasanas have no freedom at all to
refuse expression because, THEY ARE HELPLESS
UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI.
In philosophy, the Rishis often explain the Universe from
the standpoint of the macrocosm (Samashti) which has a
knack of confusing the students, unless each student
strives hard to understand its implications subjectively in
himself, as microcosm (Vyashti). Viewed thus, in the
individual subjective inner-life-story, the statement proves
to be indeed true, since without the life in us --- the Self ---
identifying with the lower nature in us, the mind and
intellect equipment cannot create the characteristic ego,
which comes to suffer its limited existence.
634
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
We have already found that the greatest scoundrel and the
noblest saint are both the same when neither of them is
identifying with his mind and intellect, in the state of deep
sleep. On waking up, the scoundrel-mind projects a
scoundrel, and the saintly-mind projects the saint; and the
Vitality behind both is the same Spark-of-Life,
Consciousness Absolute. Thus, the scoundrel is incapable
of not behaving as a scoundrel, as much as the saint
cannot, by any chance, play the scoundrel, even for a
moment. The scoundrel is as helpless as the saint, both
being "HELPLESSLY UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI"
in each. And the entire drama of the dissolution of vasana-
expressions and the projection of the vasana-dances is
performed upon the Changeless Imperishable Eternal
platform of the Self; "I PROJECT AGAIN."
THE LAW OF KARMA IS INCONTROVERTIBLE AS THE
ACTION SO THE REACTION. IF THE SELF
ADMINISTERS THE DISSOLUTION AND SUPERVISES
THE PROJECTION OF THE PLURALISTIC WORLD,
HOW FAR DOES THE LAW OF KARMA SHACKLE THE
INFINITE?... LISTEN:
9. Sitting like one indifferent, and unattached to these acts,
Dhananjaya, these acts do not bind Me.
In the case of the limited ego, its ego-centric actions leave
their impressions behind, which ultimately persecute the
little ego with their reactions. All ego-centric actions,
635
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which are always motivated by selfish desires, leave their
ugly foot-prints upon the shores of the mind (Vasanas),
while actions which are not ego-motivated leave no trail
(Vasanas), as birds leave no foot-prints as they move along
in the sky. We can compare an ungrateful son kicking his
own father, with an innocent child in a playful mood
kicking his own father, with both its legs. A philosopher's
subtle vision is not necessary to understand the difference
in texture between these two persons performing the same
action --- kicking the father. Wherever and whenever an
ego-centric action, whipped by selfish desires, is
undertaken, gross and painful reactions (Vasanas) must
necessarily ensue.
In the case of Eternal animating Its Prakriti, and projecting
out "AGAIN AND AGAIN THE MULTITUDE OF
BEINGS," there is neither any attachment (Raga) nor any
aversion (Dvesha), and therefore, by this mere happening
on the Eternal, the Supreme is not affected: "THESE ACTS
DO NOT BIND ME." It is neither ego-centric nor desire-
motivated.
However tragic and murderous the play may be, however
tearful and sad the story be, however rainy and stormy
the scene be, the white screen in the cinema hall at the end
of the play carries neither the marks of the blood spilt, nor
the stains of the tears shed, nor the wear and tear of the
storm that raged. At the same time, we all know that but
for the changeless screen, the story could never have been
unravelled through the medium of light and shade. In the
636
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
same fashion, the ever-pure Infinite, as the Self, becomes
the enduring platform for the drama of sorrow that is
expressed in the language of plurality, ceaselessly enacted
by the infinite number of egos, helplessly repeating the
parts ordered by their Vasanas, gathered by them in the
past.
The steam in the engine is not punished for the disaster of
derailment, nor is the steam complimented when the train
reaches its destination in time! Again, neither the disaster
nor the successful accomplishment of the journey could
ever take place without the steam. The engine without the
steam is inert iron assembled in a particular shape, dull
and heavy; it is the steam that dynamises and renders it
capable of its actions of cruel destruction, or kindly
construction, as the case may be. Since the steam in the
engine has neither an anxiety to move the train, nor an
aversion to move it, the steam is ignored in the
achievements of the train, whether good or bad. It is the
motive behind the action that determines its reaction.
The Self is the source of all dynamism. It dynamises the
mind. Each mind is a bundle of Vasanas. Good Vasanas
make the mind sing the song of joy and harmony. Bad
Vasanas in the mind make it groan with sobs and tears.
The needle in the gramophone is not responsible for the
song that the record sings. As the record, so the music.
Similarly, the Self is Eternal. It is unmindful of what type
of world is projected forth. Nor is It anxious in any sense
of the term, to create a better world. Sunlight illumines
637
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
whatever happens to be there in its light, be it a murder,
or be it a martyrdom. Neither the glory of the martyr, nor
the crime of the murderer can reach the Sun. The Self, as
Pure Consciousness, illumines the Vasanas and lends them
the capacity to project out, be it for the damnation of
themselves or for their own glorification. "SITTING LIKE
ONE INDIFFERENT AND UNATTACHED TO THESE
ACTS" the Self revels in the realm of Its lower nature
(Prakriti).
WHAT EXACTLY IS THIS STRANGE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE INFINITE AND THE FINITE? THE
FINITE ACTS BECAUSE OF THE INFINITE, AND YET
THE INFINITE IS SAID TO BE NEUTRAL... HOW?
10. Under Me as her Supervisor, PRAKRITI (nature) produces
the moving and the unmoving; because of this, O Kaunteya, the
world revolves.
In Vedanta, this relationship between the actionless Self
and the active non-Self has been brought out by a bunch
of analogies, each one trying to throw much light upon
this sacred tie of 'relationless-relationship.'
The rays of the Sun warm up the objects upon which they
fall, without warming the intervening medium through
which they pass. Similarly, the Self remains in Its own
Infinite glory, and the non-Self gets dynamised to act, as
Prakriti, in the mere "presence" of the Self.
638
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The king gets a fancy that he should visit a given pilgrim
centre on the full-moon day of the following month, and
having expressed this intention to his minister, the king
forgets all about it. But on the day prior to the following
full-moon, the minister approaches the king to remind
him that it is time for the royal procession. The next day,
when the king comes out, he finds that the entire route is
thronged with his subjects. Welcoming arches are raised at
different places. All detailed arrangements are planned
out and colourfully executed for his royal visit, and
return. All the officers and subjects have poured out all
their capacities and endeavour to make the royal trip to
the temple a great success.
In all these feverish activities, everyone gained his
authority and power only because of the king, and yet, the
king himself was nowhere in the picture. The minister had
his sanction from the king, and therefore, his orders were
faithfully executed by all others. Had the minister tried to
organise such a show as an ordinary citizen, he would
never have succeeded. Similarly, in the mere presence of
the Self, Prakriti borrows her sanction to plan and to
execute, to act and to achieve.
Subjectively, this becomes more clear. The Atman, merely
by Its "presence" illumines the mind and intellect and
creates for the expression of their Vasanas an entire field of
world-objects and the required instruments of experience,
constituted of the organs-of-perception and the organs-of-
action. "NATURE, WHILE I PRESIDE, GIVES BIRTH TO
639
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE WORLD OF THINGS AND BEINGS" --- "Nature"
here means "The Unmanifest, that gets projected forth as
the manifest."
The continued dance of the world-of-plurality to the
rhythm of change and death is maintained in the
"presence" of the Self; "THE WORLD WHIRLS ROUND
AND ROUND BECAUSE OF THIS." In the final analysis,
the Self does nothing. It is the Prakriti that projects and
executes; the Prakriti that gets animated in the proximity
of the Self. It is the Light of the Self that vitalises the
Prakriti and makes her exist and act. That is all the
relationship between the Self, the Purusha and the non-
Self, the Prakriti.
This will become more clear if the student tries to
understand this relationship exactly as the relationship
that can exist between the wayside post and the ghost that
is superimposed upon it by the deluded.
IF THE SELF BE THUS THE ESSENTIAL REALITY IN
EVERY FORM AND IF IT BE EVER FREE FROM THE
SORROWS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FINITE, WHY
IS IT THAT ALL BEINGS ARE NOT ABLE TO IDENTIFY
THEMSELVES WITH IT AND EXIST AS THE SELF?...
LISTEN:
11. Fools disregard Me when I dwell in human form; they know
not My Higher being as the Great Lord of all beings.
640
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the seventh chapter, while giving a discourse upon the
"Higher" and "Lower" natures of the Eternal, Krishna
declared that the FOOLISH, in their ignorance of the
Supreme State of the Higher Self, as Immutable and
Transcendental, regard the "Unmanifest" as having come
into manifestation. In this chapter while claiming to be the
Self in all, Krishna uses the same strong word, 'fools,' to
condemn those who cling to the form and lose the essence.
"UNAWARE OF MY HIGHER NATURE, FOOLS
REGARD ME" as dwelling in a particular form only!
To mistake the idol for God, or the form of the Guru for
the Infinite, is to mistake the container for the contents. An
idol is only a symbol (Pratika) for an imperceptible and
subtle Truth. To play with the milk-bottle is not to feel
refreshed when one is hungry or thirsty; playing with a
spoon and fork over an empty plate is no satisfaction
when one is really hungry. To mistake the idol to be itself
the goal is to mistake the means for the end. And such a
misunderstanding alone breeds fanatics, who sow seeds of
rivalry and jealousy, to reap, in time, a harvest of death
and disaster, all in the name of their stone-deities,
wooden-symbols, or brass-gods! Three tiny bits of
coloured khadi-cloth may make the national-flag, but that
is not my mother-land; but when I bow my head as my
country's flag goes up, I am adoring my nation; the flag is
the sacred symbol of my country's culture and its
aspirations.
641
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
With this idea in mind, if we read the stanza it becomes
very vivid and clear. The Lord says: "ordinary devotees
are unaware of My real status 'AS THE GREAT LORD OF
ALL BEINGS'," and adds that these deluded "FOOLS
SCORN ME WHEN I DWELL IN HUMAN FORM,"
meaning, when they consider Him, the Self, as merely a
human-form, which He may take for Himself, to bless a
particular generation.
WHY ARE THE FOOLS RENDERED INCAPABLE OF
RIGHT UNDERSTANDING AND CORRECT
JUDGEMENT REGARDING THE TRUE NATURE OF
THE SELF?
12. Of vain hopes, of vain actions, of vain knowledge, and
senseless, they verily are possessed of the delusive nature of
RAKSHASAS and ASURAS.
13. But the MAHATMAS (great-souls) O Partha, partaking of
My divine nature, worship Me with a single mind (with a mind
devoted to nothing else) , knowing Me as the Imperishable
Source of all beings.
In order to drive home an argument, it is the style in
Krishna's discourses that He always brings the contrasting
factors together so that each may come to shine all the
more against the background supplied by the other. Here
is a pair of stanzas in which, if the former explains the low
men deluded to pursue their baser nature (Rakshasas and
642
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Asuras), the latter paints the picture of the great-souls
(Mahatmas), possessed of all the divine qualities.
Deluded by false desires and wearied with false activities
to fulfil those wrong desires, some become confused in
intellect and totally confounded in their reasoning. Such
people lose all divine perspective and become monstrous
in their activities, expressing nothing but their demoniac
sensuous nature at all times. Such men are called here as
Rakshasas and Asuras, belonging to the tradition of Ravana.
The actions undertaken in the present leave their
impressions on the mind, and order the future desires and
thoughts in the individual. Out of vain actions, only
negative Vasanas can arise, and they can only thicken the
dull-witted stupidities of the intellect. When an individual
has lived in this ditch of falsehood and impurity, he
cannot become any nobler than a monster, in the eyes of
the "wise".
As a contrast to this Rakshasa-culture, we are shown how
men-of-Wisdom feel and act. This dissection of man's
bosom reveals to the seekers of self-development, the right
attitude they must adopt and the correct perspective with
which they must look at the things of the world.
THE GREAT-SOULS POSSESSED OF THE DIVINE
NATURE of the Self, and desiring this Infinite, seek the
Immortal by realising the Self, "THROUGH SINGLE-
POINTED SELF-APPLICATION." They "know Me to be
643
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Origin of all beings"; and those who know the mud to
be the origin of all mud-pots, cannot fail to see the mud in
all pots. So too, the true children of the Hindu culture,
who understand the Divine Principle as the "Source-of-all-
beings," cannot but respect every other member of the
society as they would respect themselves. There is no
greater and more effective socialism ever preached in the
world. If the present generation is not able to understand
the appreciate this spiritual socialism, which is the only
panacea for the ills of the world, the reason for it has been
already given in the preceding stanza --- it is because of
the predominance of the Asuric forces in it.
THE GREAT-SOULS "WORSHIP ME WITH THE
SINGLE-POINTED MIND."... HOW?
14. Always glorifying Me, striving, firm in vows, prostrating
before Me, and always steadfast, they worshipMe with devotion.
Even though in the previous stanza, while describing the
high-souls, (a) the "Path-of-Knowledge" was indicated,
here the other two main "Paths" of self-integration and
self-development are hinted at, viz., (b) single-pointed
devotion and (c) selfless activity undertaken in the true
Yajna-spirit.
GLORIFYING ME ALWAYS --- The grossest type of
glorification is done usually by a noisy crowd singing the
Lord's glories with the accompaniment of equally noisy
644
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and crude instruments! But the implication of Kirtana is
much more sacred. Indeed, to adore an ideal with
reverence and devotion, and to sing His glories, at all
times, continuously, is the silent act of a mind that has
fully opened up to appreciate the ideal that one has learnt
to glorify. The silent adoration of society by the social-
workers, or the steady flow of love that beams out from a
man of Knowledge for the entire kingdom of the living,
constitute a greater and a more potent type of Kirtana,
than the type indulged in by the noisy crowds that
assemble from their different fields of dubious activities,
for a short period each day, only to return to the same
dens of vices, after the Bhajana.
STRIVING WITH FIRM RESOLVE --- These are simple
logical facts that are generally overlooked by the seekers
and they dig the graves for their own success in spiritual
practices. The majority of people believe that some specific
routine acts of devotional flavour pursued physically for a
short period of time on particular days of the week, is all
their part of the game. The rest is for their imaginary gods
to cook and bring in front of them, dressed to taste! This
absurd, superstitious idea has nothing to do with the
Science of Self-perfection, of which religion constitutes its
technical aspect.
Constant and conscious effort is unavoidable if an
individual is to get himself hauled out from his present
ruts of wrong thinking and false valuations of life and
living. The disharmony he experiences in life, and the
645
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
wrong notes that are sung by the situations in life upon
the harp of his heart are all due to the maladjustments in
his instruments-of-experience. Their readjustment calls for
continuous vigilance, non-stop self-application, and
sincere pursuit.
Of course, while thus striving for self-redemption,
vacillations caused by instinctive biological temptations
would often reach the seeker to whisper in his ears and
make him eat the 'FORBIDDEN FRUIT.' But at such
moments of strong temptations, he must make a firm
resolve (Dhridha-Vratah) to reject the false and to walk
steadily the path-of-the-Real.
True devotion is unalloyed love. Love is measured in
terms of the lover's identification with the beloved.
Devotion to "ME, THE ORIGIN OF BEINGS, AND THE
IMMUTABLE" is the way for the deluded ego to identify
itself with the Self. And this is brought to a successful
culmination only by the process of detaching itself from
its non-Self conditionings. This negative aspect of self-
withdrawal from the layers of the non-Self is indicated by
the "BOWING DOWN TO ME." The positive side of the
art of Self-realisation is pursued, when, with a steady
single-pointed mind, the seeker comes to meditate till,
ultimately, he re-discovers for himself his total
identification with the Self. This positive aspect is
indicated by the phrase: "IN DEVOTION."
646
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The withdrawal of ourselves from our misconceived
identities and the final re-discovery of our infinite
potentialities, through our constant devotion to the Self,
can be achieved only by those among us who "ARE
STEADFAST AND
WORSHIP ME."
The "Path-of-Knowledge" knows no flower-throwing or
chandana-sprinkling methods of ritualistic worship. To
keep in the mind an alert and vigilant flow of thoughts in
our adoration for the nature of the Self as the Substratum
of the entire Universe and the Essence in all beings is the
truest worship that can open up the buds of our ego-
centric lives into blossoms of God-men, wafting their
fragrance of Perfection around.
15. Others also, offering the "Wisdom-sacrifice" worship Me,
regarding Me as One, as distinct, as manifold --- Me, who in all
forms, faces everywhere.
Jnana Yajna has no ritualism. It is a constant attempt on the
part of the performer to see, in and through the
experienced names and forms, the expression and vitality
of the One Conscious Principle, the Self. The seeker here,
practising Jnana Yajna has understood the significance of
the Vedantic assertion that the Immutable Self pervades
all, penetrating everything, and in Its homogeneous web
647
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of existence, It holds together the phenomenal multiplicity
and their variegated inter-actions.
Chocolates made by different firms, irrespective of their
shapes and colours, flavours and prices, are all chocolates
and, therefore, their essential nature of sweetness is
common to all of them; and the child who is seeking the
sweetness of the chocolates will enjoy them, whatever be
their shape, size, or packing.
Similarly, a seeker of the Self watches for, observes and
detects the expression of the Self in all forms and names,
in all situations and conditions. Whatever be the setting in
which diamonds are held together, to a diamond
merchant all of them are so many points of brilliance and
light, and he evaluates them according to the light-content
in each one of them and not the design or beauty of the
ornament.
A man of realisation moves about the world, seeing his
own Self, expressed through every movement and action,
word and thought that clusters round him at all times. Just
as one light in the midst of a thousand mirrors comes to
provide crores of reflections everywhere, so too, the one
centred in the Self, when he walks out into the world, sees
everywhere his own Self dancing, shooting glances at him
from all around at once, thrilling him always with the
homogeneous ecstasy of perfection and bliss.
648
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the sparkle of the eyes, in the smile of a friend, in the
grin of an enemy, in the harsh words of jealousy and in
the soft tones of love, in heat and in cold, in success and in
failure --- among men, among animals, amidst the trees
and in the company of the inert, everywhere, he
successfully gains the auspicious vision of the Supreme,
either as EXISTENCE PURE or as KNOWLEDGE
ABSOLUTE or as BLISS INFINITE!! This is the meaning of
Ishwara Darshana or the Atma Darshana which is sung so
gloriously in all the scriptures of the world. To watch for
and discover the smile of the Divine through the trellis of
names and forms is to live in the constant spirit of Jnana
Yajna.
To adore Him in all visions, to recognise Him in all
situations, to feel Him with each thought, is to live in a
constant remembrance of the Self, and therefore, such
people "worship the Self through the wisdom-sacrifice
(Jnana Yajna)."
In the beginning, this attempt of seeing the Self is a
conscious act, not without its unpleasant strain. But as the
seeker develops in his own spiritual cognition of the Self,
the Awareness Divine within him, it becomes easy for him
to recognise the One Self splashing Itself upon the myriad
forms of Its own effulgent glory: "ME, WHO IN ALL
FORMS FACES UP EVERYWHERE."
The Man-of-Realisation not only experiences the Pure Self,
uncontaminated by the pluralistic equipments, but, also
649
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
recognises the same Self as playing through the endless
variety of conditionings available in the universe. Having
known the one Sun in the sky, even if we see a thousand
reflections of the same in different equipments, in all of
them, we see and recognise only the one Sun.
According to Vedanta, Self-realisation is not at all complete
if the realised one can keep his composure and equanimity
only in solitude and silence; if he recognises and
experiences the Divine only at some rare moments of his
transcendental experiences, then he is not the Man-of-
Wisdom glorified by the Rishis of the Upanishads. This is
not the way of the Yogis. A Man-of-true-Knowledge is he
to whom the Self alone is the Truth within, without, and
everywhere. "The One pervades all and nothing pervades
It." To him a market place of the busiest tensions is as
much a conducive place for cognising the Self as the quiet
Himalayan valleys and their deep caves of roaring silence.
With his eyes shut, he, from the balcony of the Infinite in
himself, gazes out to experience nothing but his own Self
everywhere.
In my legs as well as in my hands, I pervade equally at all
moments. I know I am there. To say that this knowledge
makes my hands and legs disappear, as mist disappears at
sunrise, is sheer lunacy and not the assertion of a true
science. Just as I permeate, exist, enjoy, and experience in
and through every little portion of my body, all through
my waking hours, at one and the same time, so too, the
man-of-Realisation realises that at all times, his own Self
650
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
permeates the entire universe, in His Infinite domain ---
"AS ONE, AS DISTINCT, AS MANIFOLD."
Vedanta preaches the recognition of Divinity and the
experience of the Infinite in and through life. It is not a
passing experience lived through an accidental
movement. It is not an occasion to celebrate by
distributing laddus and then to retire for ever from that
experience. Just as the knowledge acquired by an
individual through his education keeps him constant
company, at all times and in all conditions --- even in his
dream --- even so, nay, much more powerfully, much
more intimately, much more irredeemably, the "knower-
of-the-Self becomes the Self"; there is no doubt about it.
The truth of the Vedantic declaration is upheld by the
assertion in the second line: "ME, THE ALL-FORMED,
THEY WORSHIP, AS ONE, AS DISTINCT AND AS
FACING EVERYWHERE, IN EACH FORM."
All that we have so far said is being endorsed here. No
doubt, through meditation, when the mind is stilled, the
Pure Self, the One-without-a-second, is realised. The
knower of the mud can easily recognise the mud in all
pots; the shape, size and colour of the pot do not destroy
the mud. Similarly, the apparent and delusory names and
forms, superimposed upon the Truth, cannot and do not
veil the Truth from the "vision" of the Man-of-Truth. Not
only does the Seer recognise the Self in each individual
separately, but Krishna, the upholder of Vedanta thunders
that the Truth is recognised "IN EACH FORM, AS
651
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FACING EVERYWHERE." It is absurd to say that one
discovers the essential nature of the pot only on the right-
hand bottom of the mud-pot! The mud is in the pot, facing
everywhere, at all times; where the mud is not, there the
pot is non-existent. When the Self is not, there, the
perception of the multiple existence is never possible.
IF, IN A VARIETY OF FORMS, DIFFERENT TYPES OF
WORSHIP ARE PERFORMED, HOW DO THEY ALL
BECOME THE WORSHIP OF THE ONE SELF?
16. I am the KRATU; I am the sacrifice; I am the offering (food)
to PITRIS (or ancestors) ; I am the medicinal herb, and all
plants; I am the MANTRA I am also the clarified butter; I am
the fire; I am the oblation.
Repeating the idea already expressed earlier in a famous
stanza in the Geeta, (IV-24) this verse expresses how the
Self is the existence everywhere, in all actions and factors
constituting actions. Ritualistic actions constitute worship.
At the time of the Mahabharata, divine worship was
always undertaken in Vedic ritualism (Kratu), by ritualistic
adoration of the deity as prescribed in the Smriti (Yajna),
or by food-offerings for the ancestors (Swadha). Arjuna is
here taught that all these methods of worship are, in a
sense, nothing but the worship of the Self.
Not only are the different ritualistic prescriptions all
presided over by the Self, but the medicinal herbs
652
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
(Oushadha) used in the sacrifice, the ghee (Ajya --- clarified
butter) poured into the altar-of-fire the oblations (Hutam)
offered, the fire (Agni) that is invoked, the mantras chanted
--- all of them are nothing but the Self alone expressed
through different equipments in different fields. When a
variety of ornaments is made from a mass of gold, the
gold can certainly say that "I am the pendant, I am the
ring, I am the chain, I am its shine, I am its hook; I alone
am its shape and its glory." Similarly, the Self, being the
essence of all happenings and circumstances in which the
devotee attempts to adore the Eternal, this assertion here
is perfectly acceptable to all philosophic-minded readers.
AGAIN:
17. I am the Father of this world, the Mother, the supporter and
the grandsire; the (one) Thing to be known, the Purifier, (the
syllable) OM, and also the RIK, the SAMA and the YAJUH
also.
The Self is not a vague imperceptible Spirit of Existence in
all fields of divine activities --- sans-emotion, sans-
relationship, sans-qualities. In order to show that there is
an ardour of love that permeates the very essence of the
Self everywhere, the finite relationships of the world are
mentioned to indicate the mass of love that the Self is. "I
AM THE FATHER, THE MOTHER, THE SUSTAINER,
THE GRANDSIRE, THE PURIFIER OF THE WORLDS."
653
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The verse insists, "I AM THE ONE THING TO BE
KNOWN" --- and this is the repeated assertion in all the
scriptures. The Self is "That, having known which,
everything else becomes known." To know the Self is to
destroy the consciousness of imperfection, the existence
finite, the sorrows poignant. To live in the ego, as a mere
embodied self, is to live self-exiled from all the Divine
potentialities that one is heir to. To re-discover this infinite
Beatitude is the only satisfying end and goal of life, where
alone an awakened intellect can discover a haven of peace
and an enduring existence in perfect tranquillity.
The Self, the Substratum of the entire universe, is
symbolised by the Vedic mantra called Omkara. Life is
conceived of as 'the flow during our waking, dreaming,
and deep-sleep states.' The Substratum for these three
states and their experiences must be something other than
these three, inasmuch as the rider is always different from
the ridden, the container is different from the contents.
The Substratum is different from the superimposition
upon it.
This fourth-state, supporting and embracing the three
ordinary states of consciousness in every one of us, is
termed as Turiya by the Upanishad Seers. The one symbol
representing all these four states is called Omkara, and
naturally, therefore, the Ultimate indicated by OM, is the
Self, conceived of, for the purpose of worship, as Krishna
in Shrimad Bhagavata.
654
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Self is the Essence indicated by OM, and this Absolute
Reality is the One theme, tacitly expressed, or indirectly
implied, in all the Vedas, and therefore, it is said "I AM
ALSO THE RIK, SAMA AND YAJUH."
FURTHER:
18. I am the Goal, the Supporter, the Lord, the Witness, the
Abode, the Shelter, the Friend, the Origin, the Dissolution, the
Foundation, the Treasure-house and the Seed Imperishable.
Continuing the theme of the status of the Self as the very
essence behind the seeming plurality of the world ---
recognised in our ignorance, and in fact nothing but a
dreamy superimposition gathering its existence from the
Reality behind it --- the Lord describes Himself with a host
of suggestive words strung together to form this exquisite
verse, pregnant and full, for all students of meditation.
I AM THE GOAL (Gati) --- All our seeking ends when all
imperfections vanish in the total experience of the Perfect.
To one frightened by the vision of a delusory serpent in a
piece of rope, consolation and satisfaction can come only
when his delusion has ended by the discovery of the rope.
The Self is the Substratum of the sorrow-ridden universe
of multiplicity; to realise the Self is to transcend all the
choking sense of limitations. The Knowledge-Absolute by
gaining which all becomes known, is shown here as the
Self.
655
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
I AM THE SUPPORTER (Bharta) --- Just as the desert
supports the illusory pool of water, which the thirsty
traveller sees in his delusion, so too, the Self is the
Supporter of everything. As Absolute-Existence It lends a
semblance of reality to the perceptions of the sense organs,
and thus holds together the flood-of-change into a
consistent pattern, called life.
I AM THE LORD (Prabhu) --- Even though the Self thus
lends Its grace to the realm of imperfections sustained and
maintained by the agitations of the mind, as the Pure
Awareness, It is ever beyond the sorrows and joys of the
apparent and illusory universe. Through different
equipments, electricity may pass, manifesting different
expressions of its own glory, but in none of them does
electricity lose itself, if we consider the current as pure
energy.
In all this panorama of expressions, the Self, though It
lends Existence to them, Itself remains as a mere Witness.
"I am the Witness" (Sakshi) --- he is considered a true
witness of an incident, "who is not in the incident, but
who happened to witness it, not from too far, with neither
attachment nor aversion." When things happen of their
own accord in one's presence then one becomes the
witness of that happening. The Infinite is but a witness of
the finite inasmuch as the Self is an uninterested
illuminator of what is happening in the harem of the
intellect, in the arena of the mind, in the courtyard of the
body, and in the wide expanse of the world without.
656
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
I AM THE ABODE (Nivasah) --- Truth is the House of all,
of every being and thing. On an innocent wayside post, it
is reported that some travellers saw a grinning ghost,
others a smiling ghost, and yet others, a ghost with a
bleeding mouth and sparkling eyes, naked and horrid,
and some an innocent ghost, dressed in white, invitingly
smiling and lovingly guiding them onto the right track.
All of them saw delusory projections of their individual
minds upon the same wayside post. Naturally, the post is
the "Abode," of the smiling, of the grinning, of the
bleeding, of the horrid, and of the tender ghost, that
different minds, on different occasions, projected upon the
same post. Similarly, wherever our equipments of
experiences gain the apprehension of the pluralistic
phenomena, for all of them the Self, the Awareness, is the
ABODE, the place of existence and security.
I AM THE REFUGE (Sharanam) --- Delusion breeds
sorrows, Knowledge produces joy. The universe is pain-
ridden because it is delusion-projected. Naturally, the
harbour of tranquillity, projecting a confused ego from the
mountainous breakers of the stormy ocean-of-samsara is
the rediscovery of the Substratum, the Essence of Self.
When once the Self gets individualised, when it walks out
to identify with the play, through the equipments of the
intellect, mind and body, it is wandering away from the
safety of the shore into the stormy, high seas of adventure.
When the frail boat of the ego is thus threatened from all
sides --- the darkening clouds above, the bumping sea
below, and the screaming storms all round --- the sailor's
657
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
only refuge is to come back to the tranquil harbour, the
Self!
The above descriptions put together, add up to give the
conception of the Reality as a heartless noumenon, a
dignified deity, an un-approachable realm of Perfection.
To wipe off this idea from the tender heart of emotional
seekers --- and Arjuna was one --- the Eternal, in the form
of the beloved friend of man, Krishna, is using here more
humane terms in defining himself.
I AM THE FRIEND (Suhrit) --- The Infinite is a friend of
the finite, not a nodding acquaintance from whom you
can borrow a match-box, but a friend, whose only anxiety
is for the security and the well-being of the befriended.
I AM THE ORIGIN AND DISSOLUTION, THE
SUBSTRATUM, THE STOREHOUSE --- As gold in all
ornaments and mud in all pots, the Self is in the whole
universe, and therefore, all things can come to
manifestation from and dissolve into the unmanifest, the
substratum, which can hence be considered as the "the
storehouse" of all names, forms and qualities that
constitute the multiple world.
I AM THE IMMUTABLE SEED (Beejam Avyayam) --- There
is a contrast here with all other seeds, which perish when
they germinate and produce trees. The Self is no doubt the
Origin of the "Tree-of-Samsara," but in the production of
this tree, the Self is not transformed, It being ever
658
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Immutable. The idea of the Eternal Principle, modifying
itself to become the created world is a disgrace to the logic
of human thinking, and Vedanta discards such a
philosophically fallacious notion. The dualists, however,
are compelled to take it up, or else, the very edifice of their
arguments will crumble down like a castle of clouds, built
upon an autumnal sky.
This, as we have already indicated, is a verse replete with
simple terms, each an avenue for the meditator to reflect
upon, and in a pleasant stroll reach the gateway
of Truth.
FURTHER:
19. (As Sun) I give heat; I withhold and send forth the rain; I
am Immortality and also death, both Existence and Non-
existence, O Arjuna.
I GIVE HEAT --- The electricity can rightly say that it
gives heat in the heater, light in the bulb, cold in the
refrigerator, because electricity conditioned through those
equipments expresses itself as the above-mentioned ---
heat, light and cold. Similarly, the Self, the one Existence,
identifying with the phenomenon called the Sun becomes
the source of all heat for the entire universe.
659
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
I WITHHOLD AND SEND FORTH RAIN --- Not only do
the modern meteorologists understand the influence
which the Sun has upon the climatic conditions of the
world, but the Rishis of old too had a perfect knowledge of
the ways and behaviour of nature, and had well
understood that the position, condition and nature of the
Sun determines the climate that comes to bless, or curse,
the world. The influence of the Sun controls the fields of
experience of every living creature on the globe, since it
controls the climatic conditions. If the Sun were to send
out a few more degrees of heat the entire flora and fauna
of the world would change. So too, will be the
transformation, complete and total, of the entire look of
the world, if the Sun were to withhold even a few calories
of the heat that it is radiating now. Immediately, there
would be a march from the north pole and the south pole
towards the equator, driving men and beings towards the
central belt of the globe, causing more intense sorrows of
over-population and lack of sufficient food!
I AM IMMORTALITY AND ALSO DEATH --- If life, the
Consciousness, were not illumining experiences, it would
become meaningless and purposeless, and the Self, being
the Spark of life, is the essential stuff that gives a realistic
experience of existence to the very phenomenon of death.
To realise the Self as the Immutable and the Eternal, is
to reach the State of Immortality. Change is death, and
therefore, the phrase is to be understood as saying that
660
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"the Self is the illuminator of change, Itself ever the
Changeless."
I AM EXISTENCE AND NON-EXISTENCE --- To perceive
and experience 'Existence' and 'Non-existence,' a positive
illuminator of both is necessary, and the illuminating
Consciousness must be able to embrace both Sat and Asat
in its all-comprehending Knowledge. It is impossible to
know and gain an experience of the total Non-existence;
wherever we experience Non-existence, we experience it
as "the Non-existence that exists."
Apart from this highly subtle philosophical interpretation
there is a simpler significance for the phrase. Sat and Asat
are terms used in Vedanta to indicate the 'cause' and
'effect': the UNMANIFEST and the MANIFEST. The Self
being that Illuminating Factor --- without which we can
experience neither the unmanifest (THOUGHTS) nor the
manifest (OBJECTS) --- the Self Eternal is conceived of as
the Essence in both the manifest and the unmanifest.
Without the mud, no pot is possible; with mud all pots
can exist; and therefore, the mud can claim: "I am the pots
of all sizes, shapes and colours."
This stanza can provide a lifetime inspiration to the
meditators at their seat of contemplation, while "barrelling
their thoughts," before shooting forth into the voiceless
and Nameless.
661
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES IN THE
WORSHIP OF THE ETERNAL WITH DESIRES, WILL
COME TO THEIR FULFILMENT... HOW?
20. The Knowers of the three VEDAS, the drinkers of SOMA ,
purified from sin, worshipping Me by sacrifices, pray for the
way to heaven; they reach the holy world of the Lord-of-the-gods
and enjoy in heaven the Divine pleasures of the gods.
21. They, having enjoyed the vast heaven-world, when their
merits are exhausted, enter the world-of-the-mortals; thus
abiding by the injunctions of the three (VEDAS) , desiring
(objects of) desires, they attain to the state of "going-and-
returning" (SAMSARA) .
When those who are well-read in the three Vedas and who
know the prescriptions laid down for the rituals, perform
those sacred acts of devotion and sacrifice with a desire to
enjoy the celestial bliss, "THEY COME TO ENJOY, IN
HEAVEN, THE DIVINE PLEASURES OF THE DEVAS."
The Soma drink is the milky juice of a creeper-plant which
is used in the rituals and taken in very small quantities at
the end of the function. Thus, the phrase "DRINKING
THE SOMA-JUICE" is to be understood as 'when the
performance of the ritual has concluded.' These desire-
prompted ritualisms yield finite results and Krishna
indicates that these ego-centres, after having enjoyed in
662
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the celestial realms, "ENTER THE MORTAL WORLD ON
EXHAUSTION OF THEIR MERITS."
The disgust which the Lord feels for such men and their
unintelligent seeking for the finite, is clearly expressed
when He concludes how these ritualists, "ABIDING BY
THE INJUNCTIONS OF THE THREE VEDAS, DESIRING
DESIRES. THEY REPEATEDLY COME AND GO."
WHAT ABOUT THOSE MEN WHO WORSHIP THE
ETERNAL WITH DESIRELESS LOVE, AS THE
SUBSTRATUM FOR THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE?
22. To those men who worship Me alone, thinking of no other, to
those ever self-controlled, I secure for them that which is not
already possessed (YOGA) by them, and preserve for them what
they already possess (KSHEMA) .
Here is a stanza which, with equal emphasis, discloses a
secret by which glorious success can be assured for the
spiritual as well as the material seekers. It is significant
that this stanza is almost in the centre of the Geeta. We
shall try to follow the implications, both spiritual as well
as secular, of this stanza, one by one.
Those who, with a single-pointed mind, thus meditate
upon Him as the One and the Only Reality behind the
entire universe, Krishna promises here that "TO THEM
EVER SELF-CONTROLLED, I BRING YOGA AND
663
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
KSHEMA," meaning more and more spiritual vigour
(Yoga) and the final experience of Beatitude (Kshema)
which is liberation
resulting from the fulfilled Yoga.
Now, considering it as a tip for the men in the market-
place, sweating and toiling in the world, the very same
stanza yields a code of secret instructions by which they
can assure for themselves complete success in their
worldly life. In any undertaking, if a man is capable of
pouring out his self-willed thought (sankalpa) constantly
and with a singleness-of-purpose, he is sure to succeed.
But unfortunately, the ordinary man is not capable of
successfully keeping his thoughts in one channel of
thinking. Therefore, his goal seems to be ever receding
and flickering. His determination to achieve a particular
goal ever changes, since his goal itself seems to be ever-
changing. To such a man of haphazard determination, no
progress is ever possible in any line of undertaking.
The greatest tragedy of the age seems to be that we ignore
the obvious fact that thoughts alone create. Activities gain
a potency from the thought-power that feeds them. When
the feeder behind is choked and dissipated, the execution-
power in the external activities becomes feeble in strength
and efficiency. Thoughts, from a single-pointed mind,
must flow steadily in full inspiration, enthusiasm and
vigour towards the determined goal which the individual
has chosen for himself in life.
664
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Mere thinking, in itself, is not sufficient. No doubt, actions
are necessary. Many of the present-day youths, though
capable of consistently maintaining a goal-of-life in their
intellect, are not ready to get into the field and act as best
as they can for its achievement. The term 'Upasana' means
"worship." Through worship we invoke the deity,
meaning "the profit potential in any given field" and the
prefix Pari to this familiar term 'Upasana,' indicates a total-
effort in which no stone is left unturned for carving out
one's victories in one's field of endeavour.
So far, two main secret factors without which success in
life will not be assured are revealed --- (a) CONSISTENCY
OF WILLING AND THINKING, and (b) POURING OUT
OURSELVES WITH A SINGLENESS OF PURPOSE in
meeting the situation in its entirety. The third main factor
that is essential in the constitution of one who is marked
out for spectacular success and brilliant gains in life is (c)
SELF-CONTROL.
As an aspiring individual, consistently maintaining his
ambition in mind, walks out into his fields of activity to
battle with the immediate problems, he will meet with
many a tempting channel of more fascinating plans,
through which he can dissipate himself and get
exhausted, rendering himself incapable of conquering the
highest success in his own field. To keep oneself SELF-
CONTROLLED, so that one may not thus get derailed as
one shoots forward to reach the temple of success, is the
665
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
third great factor that is to be kept in mind and lived fully,
in order that success in life be assured.
The terms 'Yoga' and 'Kshema' defined as "the power to
gain (Yoga), and the power to guard (Kshema)"
respectively, by Shankara in his commentary, are quite
applicable in the context of our discussion. In life, all
conflict and contests, all struggles and sorrows, whatever
be the form in which they may appear, are always
different from individual to individual, from place to
place, and from time to time, and all of them distinctly fall
into two groups, as (a) the struggles to gain, and (b) the
efforts to guard what might have been gained. These two
tensions tear into bits the joy and tranquillity of life. He
who is without these two preoccupations is the luckiest, in
the sense that he has gained all that is to be gained; and
when these two factors are totally blotted out from one's
life, one is dead to the world of sorrows --- and one
awakens to the world of joy imperishable.
It is promised here by the Lord that to the one who is
capable of maintaining the three factors described above,
and pursuing them diligently, there need be NO
ANXIETY TO GAIN, NOR WORRY TO GUARD, because
these two responsibilities will be voluntarily undertaken
by the 'Lord Himself.' Here the term Lord may be
understood as the "Law" behind the world-of-plurality
and all the happening therein. When water is let out from
a height for purposes of irrigating the lower planes, we
have only to allow it to flow in the right direction, to reach
666
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the required area --- and nature itself will carry it down,
for, it is the 'law of nature' that water always flows from a
higher to a lower level. Similarly here, to one who is
working, fulfilling the three great laws pertaining to the
physical, mental and intellectual disciplines, success
SHALL dog the heels of such a careful ruler of
circumstances.
OPENING UP A NEW SECTION, TO DISCUSS THE
MISGUIDED WORSHIPPERS, WHO ADORE AT THE
ALTARS OF THE DEITIES THAT PRESIDE OVER
FINITE, MATERIAL GAINS, THE FOLLOWING IS SAID:
23. Even those devotees, who, endowed with faith worship other
gods, worship Me alone, O son of Kunti, (but) by the wrong
method.
All the people in the world do not worship at the same
altar. Not only is this physically impossible, but it is
psychologically absurd, since tastes differ from person to
person.
The devotees, during their respective worship at the
different altars, adore the same Vitality that is the
Substratum for the created world of change. Even when
they worship different deities, if their devotion is
sufficiently reinforced with perfect faith, they are invoking
nothing but the one Eternal Truth expressed through the
form of their adoration. When once we accept the Infinite
667
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Reality as "One-without-a-second," remaining the same in
the past, present, and future, it is evident that the Self, as
Consciousness --- that expresses through the equipments
of all Saints and Sages, Prophets and Incarnations of the
past --- is one and the same.
Toleration is the very breath of the Hindu creed, and we
have already discussed earlier, how non-dualists,
accepting the Absolute as Infinite, cannot but be tolerant.
Intolerance is the creed of those who accept a single
Prophet as God. Even among Hindus, all these who
worship as members of a particular creed or sect, are
generally found to be unrelenting fanatics. Some crude
examples are even noticed where a devotee of one deity
believes that, to utter blasphemies against the deities of
others is adoration of his own beloved Lord! These are
mere perversions, obnoxious and vulgar, which have no
sanction in the Bible of the Hindus or anywhere in the
cultural tradition initiated by
the Rishis.
The large-heartedness and endless love in the heart of
Krishna makes him declare here that "THEY TOO
WORSHIP ME ALONE, EVEN THOUGH BY WRONG
METHODS."
The stanza, viewed as an instruction for the external life in
the work-a-day-world, suggests that, instead of seeking
the infinite profit of the Bliss of Self-hood, those devotees
668
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
who are trying to invoke other limited gains in the
different fields of human activity, are also invoking the
Grace of the Self --- only "BY THE WRONG METHOD."
Even the most sensuous, when he is planning to earn, to
save and to spend so that he may procure, possess and
enjoy the sensuous objects, is invoking the dormant
capacities that lie in the Self in him. Sans Self none will be
able to act either negatively or positively. Even in the case
of suicide, a person is invoking Life, inasmuch as, even in
the act of raising a weapon against himself, he is misusing
the Grace of the manifested Life in him.
In this context the phrase "BY THE WRONG METHOD"
only indicates that ultimately, it leads the seekers to the
wells of dejection and sorrow that lie in the darkness of
the not-Self, instead of leading to the Bliss-of-Perfection
which is the nature of the Self.
WHY DO WE CALL THEIR METHODS AS "AGAINST
WHAT THE LAW ORDAINS"?
24. (For) I alone am the enjoyer in and the Lord of all sacrifices;
but they do not know Me in Essence, and hence they fall (return
to this mortal world) .
In all ritualistic sacrifices, the Self alone is "THE ENJOYER
AND THE LORD." It is the Self, in one form or another,
expressing some special power that goes to form the
669
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
different deities, for the invocation of whom the various
sacrifices are performed by the seekers of their grace. Here
the Lord says "I am the Immutable Reality" that is behind
all the deities that are invoked during every sacrifice with
faith and devotion, be it in a Temple or a Church, in a
Mosque or a Synagogue. But because they invoke "limited
potentials in Me" (Devatas) they do not come to realise
"My Infinite Glory revelling as their Self," and therefore,
jumping from one worship to another, they slip down to
fall into delusory confusions and endless entanglements.
Applying it to life, in all fields of activity wherein men
strive (Yajna), they are invoking some finite profit or the
other (deity), and do not strive to improve spiritually so as
to come to rediscover the Self as their own essential
nature. Treading on the slippery slopes of sensuality, they
fall to the levels of brutal animalism and prove themselves
a disgrace to the dignity and status of man.
Complete happiness and satisfaction, perfect contentment
and peace, lie only in the innermost precincts of the bosom
and not in the extrovert fields of profit and success, glory
and fame. Unmindful of this enduring profit that lies
within themselves, men, bitten by a thousand scorpions of
desire, run amuck --- bringing about chaos and sorrows
not only to themselves but to others walking the same
road. Necessarily, therefore, when a generation of such
deluded people come to live, freely encouraging their own
mental weaknesses, and never caring to pause and
estimate their own actions, the history of that period can
670
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
be written only upon the face of a blasted world with the
very blood of the killed and
the maimed --- diluted with the tears of the bereaved
mothers and widows! Indeed, they return to the sorrows
of the mortals (Chyavanti te).
HOW CAN WE SAY THAT EVEN THOSE WHO ARE
INVOKING THE ETERNAL BY METHODS WHICH THE
LAW DOES NOT ORDAIN, COME TO ENJOY THEIR
CERTAIN FRUITS?... LISTEN:
25. The worshippers of the DEVAS or gods go to the DEVAS;
to the PITRIS or ancestors go the ancestor-worshippers; to the
BHUTAS or the elements go worshippers of the BHUTAS; but
My worshippers come unto Me.
It is the law-of-life that as you think so you become. The
thoughts entertained at a given moment get crystallised to
form a blue-print for the individual's character formation
in days to come. This is a fact, very well realisable by
everyone in his own life. Applying this natural law of
psychology in the field of spiritual self-development, Lord
Krishna says: "VOTARIES OF THE DEVAS GO TO THE
DEVAS," etc. The worshippers of the Devas, ancestors
(Pitris), and the elements (Bhutas), as a result of their
worship and adoration with single-pointed mind for a
sufficiently long time, come to attain the desires of their
constant meditation.
671
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Devas, we have seen, represent the various sense-organs,
through which we experience the world. To indicate the
work done, by the term denoting the instrument with
which the work is executed, is quite common in life. To
axe, to scissor, to knife, to hammer, to steer, to pen, etc.,
are examples wherein the name of the instrument is
employed to indicate the work done with it. Similarly,
here also, the plural noun 'Devas,' may be taken to mean
"the entire field of all physical experiences." Those who
are courting the external world of joys and successes
consistently and with the required amount of devotion,
come to gain that field of demanded experiences.
Accepting the term 'Pitri' as denoting the 'ancestors,'
'votaries of ancestors' would mean 'persons who are
enthusiastically alive to the cultural purity and tradition of
their ancients, and who are striving to live up to those
ideals.' An individual, who is constantly endeavouring to
live up to the ancient cultural tradition of spiritual India,
as a result of his constant self-application, comes to gain
the beauty and the shine of the exquisite life of purity and
perfection.
The ancient Seers of our land did not overlook the fact
that, apart from the spiritual aims, in any society, there
would also be active scientific enquiries and repeated
discoveries that were possible among the folds of Mother
Nature's own garments. The active quest in the field of
"objective-sciences" is a part of man's hunt for knowledge,
and therefore, the "worshippers of the Bhutas," are the
672
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
secular scientists who try to observe, codify and
systematize the observed knowledge of physical nature
and behaviour of things and beings as it is now done
under such classifications as Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Zoology, Botany, Engineering, Agriculture, Politics,
Sociology, Geography, History, Geology, and so on --- an
endless array of specialised lines of investigation,
adopted, pursued and accepted by the modern world. A
large portion of the Atharvana Veda gave us the accepted
theories of nature and its behaviour, as finally conceived
of by the Rishis of that time. The psychological theory,
which Krishna is observing here, is applicable to all
branches of human endeavour --- that is, if one were to
pursue diligently even in the secular field, success would
be assured in direct proportion to the amount of self-
application put forth by the seeker.
Thus, if consistency of meditation upon the Devas yields
the Devas; if constant meditation upon the "ancestors"
takes us to our ancestral heritage; and if diligent self-
application in the fields of intellectual enquiry (Bhutas) can
ultimately assure us a positive success in ripping open the
secret vaults of nature --- then, according to the same
principle, we are assured that, "MY VOTARIES COME
UNTO ME." By constant meditation, with a single-pointed
mind, upon the nature of the Self, the meditator can, in the
long run, successfully discover his total identity with the
Self, Eternal and Immutable. In our elementary text-books
on Vedanta, this technique of the ego's constant meditation
on the Self and its ultimate transformation into the Divine
673
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Self, has been indicated by comparing it with the manner
in which a "worm" is transformed into a wasp.
The attempt of the Geeta is to give, not only the Jnana but
also to supply the Vijnana. In order to convince the
student that this elementary technique can take the seeker
to the highest achievements, this stanza is given. Just as
consistent pursuit with all dedicated self-application
brings, in the end, sure success in all fields of activity of
art or science, so too, in the realm of the "within," and
ultimately in the field of spiritual achievement, constant
meditation will definitely pay. The logic behind this
assurance is given here by the Lord.
CAN MERE WORSHIP WITH DEVOTED THOUGHTS,
HOWEVER SINCERE, BRING ABOUT SUCH AN
ABSOLUTE SUCCESS? IS IT NOT NECESSARY THAT
WE SHOULD PURSUE ALL THE ELABORATE RITUALS
THAT THE VEDAS PRESCRIBE, AND OFTEN SEEM TO
INSIST UPON?... LISTEN:
26. Whoever offers Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit,
water, that I accept, offered by the pure-minded with devotion.
There is no religion in the world which does not recognise
and encourage offerings by the devotees. The modern
educated man is rather surprised as to why the Infinite
Lord, in all religions, needs insignificant things like a
spoonful of oil for His lamp, or a candle, or even an edifice
674
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
to house Himself --- be it a church, a mosque, or a temple.
Dreary intellects, poisoned with their own
misunderstanding, have even come shamelessly to insist
that these Houses-of-God should be converted into
hospitals and schools, lunatic asylums and maternity
homes!
But I believe that I am talking to a world which has not
reached this nadir of depravity. Not yet. In a society
where there is still the play of healthy hearts and virulent
intellects, there is certainly a need for temples and
worship. And in these Houses-of-God, it is not the
intricacies of their design, elaborateness of the ritual, nor
the splendour of gold and wealth exhibited, nor even the
number of devotees attending, that contribute to their
essential success.
The very language and diction of the stanza clearly sound
the note that the material objects that one might offer are
of no value to the Lord of the Universe, but it is the
devotion and love that prompt the offerings that are
accepted by the Deity. Be it "A LEAF, A FLOWER, A
FRUIT, OR WATER," it is but an insignificant thing that
you offer; be it a golden temple, or be it a dry leaf,
"WHOSOEVER WITH DEVOTION OFFERS," whatever be
the offering, the Lord of Vrindavana assures "THAT I
ACCEPT." For, when lovingly given, it becomes "A
DEVOUT GIFT" and when it is offered by a sincere
"PURE-MINDED" student, the Lord has to accept it.
675
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
There are several carefully coined words in the stanza
which explain the theory of sacrifice insisted upon in all
religions. No doubt, the Absolute requires no offering at
all from the finite mortals to complete Its Perfection, or to
maintain Its Infinite Glory. The limited individuals try to
offer at the Altar of their Lord something that they
have MISAPPROPRIATED from the Lord's own garden,
the world. In a public park, a lover often pinches a flower
from the nearby bush and offers it to his beloved.
Similarly, a devotee steals something from the Lord's own
plucks, and offers the same unto Him. In fact, when thus
we analyse carefully, we know the hollowness of the
vanity of offering something unto the Lord.
And yet, this is insisted upon as an important ritual in all
forms of worship. In offering a flower, or a fruit unto the
Lord, if the devotee feels that he is making a sacrifice of
the very thing that he offers, he is misusing the very act.
The flower, here, serves only the purpose of a spoon in
conveying something unto the Lord. While taking soup,
one, no doubt, lifts the spoon many times to the mouth
but at the end of the dinner the spoon remains the same as
before, having finished its work. The flowers and fruits in
the garden or in the temple, remain the same, but when
the devotee gathers and carries them to the Altar, and
offers them, they become the conveyors of his love and
dedication unto the Lord of his heart.
676
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This idea has been brought out in this stanza, when the
Lord says: "THAT I ACCEPT... THE DEVOUT GIFT OF
THE PURE-MINDED."
Therefore, on the whole, it is clear that an offering can be
efficient, only when it is accompanied by the two required
conditions; (a) "offered with devotion" and (b) "by the
pure-minded." To the extent these features are absent, all
offerings are mere economic waste and superstition-
breeding false-beliefs. If properly done, it can serve as a
good vehicle to tread the spiritual path of self-
development.
THEREFORE:
27. Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in
sacrifice, whatever you give in charity, whatever you practise as
austerity, O Kaunteya, do it as an offering to Me.
Through all activities of life one can constantly live in the
spirit of "devout offering" unto the Supreme. Throughout
the Geeta it has been, time without number, insisted upon
that the mental attitude is of supreme importance, rather
than the mere physical act. And, this is a fact which
ordinarily the seekers forget.
All acts of perception and our reactions to the perceived,
be they on the physical, mental, or intellectual levels,
make them all a "DEVOUT OFFERING UNTO HIM." In
677
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
fact, this is not an unnecessary make-belief or a mere
fancied exaggeration. Nor is it in any way, very difficult
for an individual to practise. The one Self revels
everywhere: in the teacher, in the devotee and in the Lord.
In all our life's transactions we behave, act and deal with
other names and forms, and all of them, we know, require
the Existence of the Self to uphold them. To remember the
Self during all transactions of life is to remember the
Substratum. In a cloth shop where there are cotton clothes
of different colours and sizes, textures and prices, the
shop-keeper is advised always to remember that he is
dealing with cotton clothings. This cannot be very difficult
for any sane shop-keeper, and it will be safe and profitable
for him to remember this fact, for it would prevent him
from entertaining misconceptions and thereby either
charging the exorbitant prices of woollens, or selling off
his goods as cheap as gunny bags! If a goldsmith is asked
to remember that he is working on gold, it is only for his
own benefit.
Just as cotton is in all cloth, gold in all ornaments, the Self
is the Essential-stuff in all names and forms. A devotee
who can constantly remember the Divine in all his
contacts in life, is alone the one who can give to life the
respect and reverence that it deserves. It is a law in life
that as you give unto life, so shall life give unto you. Smile
at life and life smiles; frown at life and life frowns at you;
approach life with due reverence and respect, born out of
the cognition of the Divine essence in it, and life shall
respect and revere you.
678
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When all activities are performed in the Spirit-of-Offering,
not only our love for the Supreme increases but also our
entire life becomes sanctified with a noble purpose and a
divine aim. In the context of the Geeta's insistence on
single-pointedness of mind, and devoted contemplation of
the Self, so far described, we can easily see how this stanza
provides us again with an efficient and secret method by
which the seekers are unconsciously made to remember
the Supreme constantly --- not in the deep jungles, nor in
the secret caves, but right in the field of life's contentions.
WHAT WOULD BE THE EFFECT OF SUCH A MANNER
OF LIVING LIFE IN THE PURE SPIRIT OF DEDICATED
OFFERING?... LISTEN:
28. Thus shall you be freed from the bonds-of-actions yielding
good and evil "fruits" ; with the mind steadfast in the YOGA of
renunciation, and liberated, you shall come unto Me.
This spiritual goal remaining the same, the "Divine-paths"
are different; and when the different paths are explained,
though they look very different from each other, they all
have the same scientific basis that justifies each one of
them. At many places in the Geeta, this fundamental basis
has been directly brought to the recognition of the
students, while in a few instances it is slightly veiled; yet,
careful students can always come to recognise it. In this
section, we are in the midst of a discussion on how, by
living life in a 'spirit-of-offering,' the individual can come
679
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
to claim and finally enjoy the Highest Perfection which
meditation promises and the Yajna-spirit guarantees.
When actions are undertaken without ego, the reactions of
those actions (Vasanas), whether good or bad, cannot reach
us, since he who is to suffer or enjoy the reactions would
be "out-of-station" from the given bosom. The ego acts,
and it is the ego that receives the reactions.
Hence Bhagawan says, "YOU SHALL BE FREE FROM
THE BONDAGES OF ACTIONS, GOOD OR EVIL." Since
the reactions (Vasanas) arising from fresh actions do not
add their impressions on to the mind, and since the
existing impressions (Vasanas) get wiped out during the
mind's activities in the world outside, slowly and steadily,
the mind gets almost a total purgation of all its existing
Vasanas. In short the mind becomes more and more
PURIFIED --- the term being used in its scriptural sense. A
purified mind has more concentration and single-
pointedness.
The next stage of evolution is that such a purified mind,
discovering in itself more and more discrimination, learns
to live a life of Samnyasa and Yoga. Both these terms are to
be understood in the Geeta-way. Earlier these terms have
been very elaborately discussed. Sannyasa or renunciation,
is not the physical rejection of the world, but in the
language of the Geeta, Samnyasa is the renunciation of: (a)
all ego-centric activities and (b) all anxieties or cravings
for the fruits of actions. These two effects would be
680
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
natural in one who is striving diligently in the world, as
an expression of his love for the Lord, only to dedicate, in
the end, all the results unto the Lord as his humble,
simple, 'offering.'
To the one who has come to live the Geeta-Sannyasa and
has developed, by discrimination, a mind full to the brim
with purity, Yoga is natural --- especially so, because all
through the hours of his activity he is constantly
remembering the SELF, the INFINITE.
Naturally, such a seeker discovers that his earlier
identifications with the false and the consequent sense of
limitations and pains of mortality fall off from him and he
discovers for himself his Divine Nature: "BY PRACTICE
AND RENUNCIATION YOU SHALL FIND RELEASE
AND COME TO ME."
THE SEEKER IS PROMISED THAT HE WILL GO TO
THE SUPREME. WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF THE
SELF?
29. The same am I to all beings, to Me there is none hateful nor
dear; but those who worship Me with devotion, are in Me and I
am also in them.
The Self is ONE in all beings; the same Conscious
Principle illumines the emotions and thoughts in all
bosoms of all living creatures. "I AM IN ALL BEINGS."
681
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The same Sun illumines all objects of the world and its
rays get reflected on all surfaces --- whether the dull,
rough surface of a rock, or the bright polished facet of a
jewel.
TO ME THERE IS NONE HATEFUL NOR DEAR --- If the
same Self revels in Krishna and Buddha, Shankara and
Christ, in a lunatic and in a murderer, in the good and in
the bad, why is it that some are able to recognise the
divine status of the Self and others live like worms? In the
emotional literature, expounding the Bhakti-cult, there is
always the sentimental explanation that it is because,
under the Lord's direct grace, some come to manifest a
greater amount of divinity. This theory may be
satisfactory to the few, who do not bring their reasoning
capacity into the field of religious discussion. But to the
intelligent ones, this explanation should appear absurd,
inasmuch as the Supreme would have to be considered as
exhibiting partiality to some in the world. To negate this
imperfect explanation, and to express the purely scientific
theory, krishna declares here that the Self is the same
everywhere, always, and that to the Self there is no
distinction between the good and the bad; the Self
entertains neither a particular love nor any special hatred
for any of the living beings.
This should not be understood as meaning that the Self is
an impotent factor, inert, and emotionless, with no
capacity in Itself to bless or to help. Employing the
analogy of the sunlight which we have already examined,
682
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the idea implied here can be better understood. Even
though the same sunlight reflects upon the different types
of objects in the world, it is true that the quality and the
nature of the reflecting surface will determine the clarity
and the intensity of the light reflected. On a dull piece of
rough stone there will be the least amount of light
reflected, while in a bright clean and polished mirror there
will be, perhaps, the maximum reflection.
Because of this difference, sunlight cannot be accused of
having special love for the mirror, or a disgust for the
rough stone. Applying the analogy to the subjective life, it
becomes clear that if the spiritual strength and beauty get
reflected more from the golden-hearts of the rare few and
not at all from the iron-hearts of the many, it is not
because the Self entertains in Itself any preference for, or
any prejudice against, anyone, but it is only a natural
phenomenon, happening in perfect obedience to the law
of the universe.
Though in the first line there is a total negation of any
relationship whatsoever between the Self and the not-Self,
in the following line, there is a striking idea expressed,
which as it were smothers the readers with its vivid
contradiction. "BUT THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH
DEVOTION ARE IN ME, AND I TOO AM IN THEM."
Even though the Self has neither any favour for, nor any
prejudice against the not-Self, to the extent the not-Self
"WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION" they are "IN ME
AND I TOO AM IN THEM." We can say that the ghost is
683
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in the post and the post is in the ghost, meaning thereby
the non-dual nature of the essence and the super-
impositions upon It. Those who worship the Self with
devotion come to rediscover that the worshippers
themselves are none other than the Self that is worshipped
by them. Even while recognising the GHOST the deluded
one is looking at the POST only; for the POST is the
permanent "reality" upon which the projection of the
"non-real" GHOST has been made by the deluded
observer.
THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION --- This
phrase can be initially understood as a mere ritualistic
injunction, and it calls for a closer and deeper study to
realise its spiritual implications. Worship is a technique by
which, in essence, the entire "thought-forces" in the
worshipper are mobilised and turned to flow towards a
diviner point-of-contemplation, ever seeking a total
identity with the Truth so meditated upon. When this is
done in a spirit of devotion or love, the worshipper comes
to realise his total oneness with his object-of-worship.
With this implied meaning well in mind, when we re-read
the stanza, what Krishna means in this philosophical
statement becomes amply clear. Even though Truth has
neither a preference for, nor a prejudice against anyone,
some noble souls come to experience, and later on exhibit
in themselves the effulgence of divinity, because, as the
Lord says, they, through their devoted worship, have
sought and discovered their oneness with the Divine
684
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Principle, the Self. Theirs becomes the elegance of the
Divine.
A mind, which is pre-occupied with its own ego-centric
attachments with the not-Self, cannot come to live the
Bliss-of-Perfection, while, the same mind, when it has
detached itself from its extrovert preoccupations, becomes
a ready instrument to seek and to discover its true identity
with the Self. The condition of the mind declares whether
the individual is confused or clear, bound or redeemed. A
mind that is turned outward, rushing out and panting to
gain its satisfactions in the world-of-objects, gets bound to
the finite, and comes to groan with pain and
disappointment; while the same mind when turned
inward, away from the objects, seeking the Self, comes to
rediscover its own identity with the Spiritual Centre.
In winter, inside a room one suffers from cold, while
outside there is plenty of sunshine. He who walks out of
the room into the sunshine comes to be blessed by the
warmth of the Sun while they who bury themselves in
their rooms suffer the discomforts of the cold. The Sun has
neither a preference for those who are basking under its
rays, nor has it any prejudice against those who do not
come out under its shine and warmth. In the language of
this stanza, we may call those who have walked out to the
sunny courtyard as "blessed" by the Sun, while those who
stay indoors as "not blessed" by that luminous energiser in
the sky?
685
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Never does the Geeta, at any point, encourage man's
surrender to circumstances, or to his own debilities and
incompetencies. As a Scripture of activity and optimistic
endeavour, the Geeta unmistakably emphasizes the
ultimate supremacy of man over his weaknesses and even
over his circumstances.
IS THIS PATH OF SELF-DISCOVERY AVAILABLE
ONLY FOR THE GOOD?... LISTEN:
30. Even if the most sinful worships Me, with devotion to none
else, (or with single-pointedness) , he too should indeed be
regarded as 'righteous, ' for he has rightly resolved.
The practice of devotion, understood in the special
meaning in which it is used in the Geeta, is glorified here
by indicating its effects upon each individual practitioner.
In the Geeta, Bhakti is selfless contemplation with a single-
pointed mind upon the non-dual Brahman considered as
nothing other than the very Essence in the devotee. When
this Bhakti is practised for a sufficiently long time, with the
required intensity and sincerity, the evolution in the
individual is mapped out here showing the various stages
in its efflorescence.
Ordinarily, there is a vague belief that a vicious sinner or a
desperate criminal is an outcaste, who can never dare to
enter the courtyard of heaven. This condemnation of the
immoral sinner is an unhappy mis-reading of the spirit of
686
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Vedic literature. THE VEDAS CONDEMN THE SIN, NOT
THE SINNER. The evil ways of the sinner are but
expressions of the evil thoughts in his mind, and so, if the
texture of the thoughts flowing in his mind could be
changed, the texture of his behaviour would also be
transformed. He who has come to keep consistently in his
mind, thoughts of the Lord, accomplishes, in the warmth
of his growing devotion, so total a rehabilitation of the
mental life that he cannot thereafter carry on his career in
sin.
EVEN IF A WICKED PERSON WORSHIPS ME --- Not
only does the Geeta throw its gates open to the sinners,
but the Singer of the Divine Song also seems to have great
missionary zeal to redeem all sinners, and bless them.
Even those who are given to evil ways are not debarred
from entering the field of spirituality because of their
undivine actions and the impurity of their lives. The only
insistence is that the worship of the Self must be
performed by the devotee with "undivided devotion."
Here the term 'undivided' (Ananya) can be applied both to
the 'mind of the meditator' and to the 'goal meditated
upon.' On the whole, the phrase implies that devotion can
pay its promised dividend only when the devotee, with a
single-pointed mind, contemplates upon a goal that is
non-dual and permanent. The non-dual Self is not to be
considered as different from the very Essence in the
devotee himself (Ananya).
687
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
HE SHOULD BE REGARDED AS GOOD --- Even though
he has been, till this day, a man of evil ways, wicked and
cruel, living the life of the senses, uncontrolled and
passionate, even then, from the moment he has taken to
the path of contemplation upon the Supreme, with
devotion, he is to be considered, says Krishna, as
'SAINTLY AND GOOD.' Such usage of words is common
to every language, when we want to emphatically assert a
state or condition to be fulfilled in the immediate future.
In all such cases, we claim it as a state accomplished, even
in the present 'baking the bread,' 'making the tea,' are all
examples when, even while kneading the flour or boiling
the water, we refer to these acts with a term indicating
anticipatory fulfilment. Similarly here, one who has taken
to the "Path Divine" is called, from that very moment, as
"GOOD AND SAINTLY" because he will soon (Acirat)
grow out of himself to thrive and flourish in the vaster
atmosphere of spiritual glory; it is an anticipatory
statement.
Such an individual is to be considered good and divine,
"FOR," as Krishna puts it, "HE HAS RIGHTLY
RESOLVED." In the Life Divine, right resolution is more
important than mere routine. The majority of seekers only
plod on their "paths" --- a melancholy brood, like famished
cattle, treading their way to the meat-market! Such a
melancholy procession can reach nowhere but the
butcher's block where Time hacks them into pieces! He
who steadily walks the path with an iron-heart of
resolution, open-eyed and enthusiastic, cheerful and
688
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
heroic, alone is noted for sure success and therefore, the
Flute-bearer emphatically asserts that the rightly resolved
man of evil ways is to be considered, from the moment of
his noble decision, as one especially marked out to be soon
a successful man-of-Perfection.
HOW DO WE KNOW THAT WHAT YOU ARE
TALKING IS NOT A BLUFF? WHAT EXACTLY IS THE
EFFECT OF SUCH A SINGLE-POINTED DEVOTION?
31. Soon he becomes righteous and attains Eternal Peace, O
Kaunteya, know for certain that My devotee is never destroyed.
The logical thoughts that lie behind the daring assertion of
Krishna are being indicated in this stanza. When a man of
evil ways takes to a life of single-pointed devotion
propelled by his ardent resolve, that man "SOON
BECOMES RIGHTEOUS." The term Dharma was already
explained as "the Law of Being." Just as heat is the specific
quality (Dharma) of fire, without which fire cannot exist,
the Dharma of man is the Divine Atman in his heart,
without which none of his personality layers can ever
come to express themselves. Therefore, the term
'Dharmatma,' in the stanza, is not fully expressed when it is
translated as 'a man of righteousness.'
Single-pointed devotion and self-application develop
concentration, and therefore, enhance the subtlety of
perception of the mind, and such a mind finds its balance
689
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
even in the highest altitudes of meditative flights. "IN
GOOD TIME," meaning, ere long, he gains glimpses of the
Infinite experience and thus, comes to live more and more
as a dynamic saint, wafting the fragrance of divinity
through his motives, thoughts, and actions.
This substantial edifice of peace which strengthens and
fortifies the existence in us, is the tranquillity divine,
which we come to live as our essential being when the
mind stops its mad revelry among its agitations and
excitements. There is no religion in the world which does
not point to this goal, which can be experienced when the
mind is at rest. A still mind is an open window through
which man peeps out to see himself reflected in the mirror
of Truth. The term guaranteeing here that "a true devotee
soon REACHES the Supreme Peace," is to be rightly
understood not as a destination that lies far away from us,
but only as a REDISCOVERY IN OURSELVES OF OUR
OWN REAL NATURE.
The perfection indicated in religion lies only as far away
from us as our waking state is from our dream. It is a
question of rightly adjusting the focus; if a camera is 'out
of focus' the photograph will give only a blurred
representation of fairyland, while the same scene
photographed by the same camera, well-focussed and
adjusted, gives us the photograph in all its gorgeous
beauty, and wealth of detail. A mind and intellect, mal-
adjusted and incessantly getting shunted among the ever-
rising waves of desires and passions, are not the right
690
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
instruments to cognise and discover the Truth that lies
within itself.
The second line of the stanza brings out the incomparable
missionary in Krishna, who bursts out into an assertion, in
his own rising fire and enthusiasm. After declaring the
truth that even a man of dire evil ways can start his
pilgrimage on the very day he takes unto himself the firm
resolve to re-educate his mind, and after indicating the
stages of his growth, till he reaches the Supreme Peace,
Krishna, as it were, pats Arjuna on the back and declares
"MY DEVOTEE IS NEVER DESTROYED."
Toeing the line of the Rishis, Krishna says that Arjuna
should declare from house-tops the one unchallengeable
truth that the seeker of the nobler values shall know no
failure if his resolve is firm and if he be sincere in his self-
application. The special phrase, employed here to declare
Krishna's advice to Arjuna, Pratijaneehi, has, in Sanskrit, its
own special powers of assertion, and it can express a sort
of imperative urgency. Those who are students of the
Sanskrit language can easily perceive it; those who are
not, may make a note of the same.
In short, this and the previous stanza together express that
he who has come to entertain constantly, at least in one
corner of his mind, a continuous awareness of the Divine
Principle and allows it to influence the rest of his mental
field, is the one marked out for progress and growth, both
in his life within and in his life without. Just as a blue
691
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
street light adds a blue tinge to the colour of the dresses of
all those who pass under it, irrespective of the actual
colour of their various dresses, so too, in the blaze of
Divine Awareness, even criminal thoughts rising in that
mind would gather the golden hues of godly perfections.
Just as moth-balls kept in a wardrobe protect all the
clothes kept therein and keep away all the worms, so too,
the constant Samarana of the Divine Nature of the Self
protects the human personality from the destructive
worms of its inner negativeness.
FURTHER:
32. For, taking refuge in Me, they also, who O Partha, may be of
a "sinful birth" --- WOMEN, VAISHYAS as well as
SHUDRAS --- even they attain the Supreme Goal.
As an annotation and an explanatory appendix to the
immediately preceding pair of stanzas, it is added that it is
not only those who are placed under wrong influences
and unfavourable external conditions who are redeemed
by the constant remembrance of the Divine. Those who
are victims of congenital maladjustments, both in their
mental make-up and in their intellectual constitution, also
can get their equipments readjusted and tuned up
properly by the same process of constant remembrance of
the Truth Eternal.
692
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
No doubt, there are expressions in the Vedas, in the
Puranas, and in the Smritis, which seemingly fall in line
with the language of this stanza. To condemn women,
traders (Vaishyas) and workers (Shudras) as individuals of
inferior births is equivalent to accepting that religion has
an effective influence ONLY upon a mere handful of
members of our society. This would be a denial of what
Krishna had been hammering upon from the opening
stanza onward. Therefore, we have to understand the true
implications of His words as He uses them here.
Religion is not a technique for developing the physical
body, nor is it an art to be fulfilled through the play of the
physical body. The condition and status of the physical
body have nothing to do with the evolutionary progress
which religion aims at through all its preachings. The
spiritual practices contribute to the integration of the mind
and intellect and to their progressive unfoldment, until, in
their ripeness, they shed themselves, leaving the Spirit
naked in all its divine glory. Thus, these terms, as used in
this stanza, are to be understood as indicating some
special qualities of the human mind-and-intellect,
manifested in varying degrees in different individuals, at
different times.
The "feminine-minds" (Striyah) are those that have a larger
share of deep affections and binding attachments. So too,
there are people, who have a "commercial attitude" in all
their thoughts and actions and who live in their mental
life as traders (Vaishyas), ever calculating the profits that
693
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
would accrue from all their psychological investments.
Such a calculating mind, ever looking to the profits that
could be raised, is not fit for easily evolving through the
"Path-of-Meditation." To surrender all fruits of actions is
the secret of holding the mind still, and of making it live
vitally, the Infinite, that is the content of a single present-
moment. Thus, when the Science of Spirit-development
condemns the traders, it is only a denunciation of the
particular commercial tendency of the mind. Those who
fall under the group of 'traders' PSYCHOLOGICALLY
cannot hope to progress on the Path Divine.
Lastly, mental attitudes of "slumber and slothfulness" are
indicated by the term "Shudra" here.
When we have understood that these terms, familiar in
that age, are borrowed by Krishna to indicate special types
of mind-intellect-equipments, we have understood the
stanza rightly, without pulling down the entire Geeta
from its well-merited pedestal of dignity as a Scripture of
Man.
The verse promises that, through constant remembrance
of the Lord, not are only all men of evil ways redeemed,
but even those who are not able to walk the "Path Divine,"
because of some psychological and intellectual debilities
in them, will be cured and steadily strengthened to walk
the "Path" efficiently, if they too, with single-pointed mind
and sincere devotion, learn to remember continuously,
and meditate daily upon the Divine Self.
694
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
BORN OUT OF THE WOMB OF SIN --- Sin, according to
Vedanta, is a wrong tendency in the mind created out of
the past unhealthy thought and negative living. These
wrong channels of thought (vasanas), irresistibly drive
man to live false values and bring about confusion and
chaos into his life, as well as into the lives of others. It is
these wrong tendencies, ploughed on the mental fields,
that are the sources of the feminine nature of the mind
(Stritvam), or the commercial attitude of the intellect
(Vaishyatwam), or the general dullness and somnolent
morbidity in one's inner life (Shudratwam). A dull-witted
pundita alone will have the audacity to commit the folly of
interpreting this stanza, adhering faithfully to the literal
meaning, conveniently forgetting Sri Krishna's own
definition of Varnashrama Dharma given previously in his
discourses.
In short, when these wrong tendencies are in the mind, the
Rishis have declared, in sheer kindness, that it is useless
for that mind to undertake a study of the Vedas. Therefore,
such minds were debarred from doing so. To attain the
necessary qualification for a successful study of the sacred
lore, the prescription is Sadhana. Of all the spiritual
practices (Sadhana), the most efficient is the constant
remembrance of the Lord with a heart overflowing with
love and devotion (Upasana). It is the Vedantic declaration
that through Upasana the mind gets purified --- purified of
its debilities which are classified and indicated by the
terms, "WOMEN, TRADERS AND WORKERS."
695
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When once these negative qualities have been removed
from a mind, it gains in its powers of achieving
concentration, single-pointedness and balance for its flight
to the very horizons of thought. When once the equipment
is ready and rigged for the pilgrimage, the destination will
soon be reached; and therefore, Krishna promises "EVEN
THEY ATTAIN THE SUPREME GOAL."
KRISHNA GOADS ARJUNA TO WALK THE PATH OF
SELF-REALISATION.
33. How much more (easily) then the holy BRAHMINS, and
devoted Royal saints (attain the goal) . Having reached
(obtained) this impermanent and joyless world, do worship Me
devoutly.
If the above-mentioned mental types are highly
handicapped in the race for the divine, Krishna, by a self-
answering question, very emphatically points out here,
how easy and almost natural Self-realisation and godly
life must be to those who have the mental purity of a
brahmin, or the large heart and the clear head of a Rajarshi.
A king who, having enjoyed intelligently his power and
wealth, in his complete satiation arising out of his
growing inner discrimination, comes to experience the
inward peace of true contemplation upon the Self, is
called a Rajarshi.
696
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After describing all possible types of "heads-and-hearts"
and after prescribing treatment for all of them to
rediscover their own Divine Nature, the Lord, concluding
the section, makes a general statement in the second line.
"HAVING ATTAINED THIS TRANSIENT AND JOYLESS
WORLD, WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY." This instruction to
Arjuna is an instruction for all, since, in the Geeta if Lord
Krishna represents the Self, Arjuna represents the
confused man standing impotent against the challenges of
life.
Life is lived in a field always constituted of objects,
instruments, and mental moods. These three are ever in a
state of change. Naturally, the flickering joys that come to
us in life prove to be transient. And the intervals between
any two experiences of joy are only FULL OF PAIN.
In tune with the positive and energising philosophy of
optimism which the Geeta preaches, here Krishna declares
the world to be a mere pit of sorrows, or a ditch of
despair, or a mire of disappointments, or a field of
joylessness (Asukham).
HAVING REACHED THIS WORLD, IMPERMANENT
AND JOYLESS, Krishna advises Arjuna, that he must
occupy himself in the worship of the Self. In this spiritual
activity, Arjuna has been well encouraged by the Lord
with his statements that to a heart that has not the
weakness natural to the lower evolute but has a wealth of
poise and understanding which are the hall-marks of a
697
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
higher evolute (brahmins and Rajarshis), success is easy and
sure. Therefore "WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY."
HOW THEN AM I TO WORSHIP YOU, MY LORD,
WHEN I AM TO FACE MY ENEMIES AND FIGHT MY
BATTLE?
34. Fix your mind on Me; be devoted to Me, sacrifice to Me, bow
down to Me; having thus united your (whole) Self with Me,
taking me as the Supreme Goal, you shall come to Me.
This stanza is a beautiful summary of the entire chapter
for it throws a flood of light upon many of the other
stanzas. We may say that this stanza especially serves as a
commentary to more than one verse in the chapter (Verses
14 and 27).
In all text-books of Vedanta (Brahma-Vidya), the technique
of self-development and self-perfection through the "Paths
of right-Knowledge and Meditation," has been defined as,
"Contemplation on That, talks on That, mutual discussion
on That --- and thus, to live ever mentally drowned in the
Bliss-concept of the spiritual Reality, is called by the
knowers of It, as the pursuit of Brahman." Keeping this
classical definition in mind, Vyasa steadily delineates his
aesthetic "Path of Devotion" in this stanza. The same idea
has already been brought out earlier in the chapter on
more than one occasion.
698
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
With "THE MIND EVER FILLED WITH ME, MY
DEVOTEE MAKES ALL SACRIFICES, ALL
SALUTATIONS TO ME," at all times, whatever be the
type of work that engages him. In brief, the evolution of
the mind is the very essence of all spiritual reformation in
life. Neither the conditions in which we are, our
circumstances and habits, nor the available ways of life,
nor our past, nor our present --- none of these is a bar for
evolving spiritually.
Constant awareness, maintained diligently, is the secret of
success.
When thus "YOU TAKE ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL"
Krishna promises Arjuna, "YOU SHALL COME TO ME."
We are what we are because of our thoughts. If the
thoughts are noble and divine, we become noble and
divine.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the ninth
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF ROYAL
KNOWLEDGE AND ROYAL SECRET
This chapter has been rightly entitled as the chapter
discussing the Royal Knowledge and the Royal Secret.
These two terms have been already discussed at length.
Earlier in the chapter (Verse 2) we find that, since Pure
Consciousness is the Knowledge, in whose light all
699
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
conditioned-knowledges are made possible, this Science,
dealing with the Absolute, has been rightly called as the
Royal-Knowledge. Elsewhere in the Upanishads, it has
been termed as the "Knowledge of all Knowledges"
because, "having known which there is nothing more to be
known," declares Mundakopanishad.
Om Om Om Om Om
700
