Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Chapter 12
Bhakti Yoga
The Yoga of Devotion
1. Those devotees who, eversteadfast, thus worship you, and also
those who worship the imperishable, the unmanifested --- which
of them are better versed in YOGA?
The philosophical discourses contained in the Divine
Song, though written in a conversational style, never
overlook the systematic development of its thoughts, not
only within the chapter but also from chapter to chapter.
The last chapter ended with an assurance from the Lord
that any seeker can realise the glory of the Cosmic-Form, if
only he can entertain an unwavering devotion. As a prince
of royal blood, Arjuna must have felt tickled by this great
challenge thrown at him. As a practical man of the world,
he enquires here as to the form on which he should
meditate.
The question is very intelligently put. It is quite well-
known that in the world there are two types of seekers,
seeking one and the same goal. Some meditate upon the
manifested-form of the Infinite and others contemplate
upon the unmanifested-Supreme. Both of them are
sincere; both progress onwards. But the question is as to
867
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which, out of these two types of seekers, is better versed in
Yoga?
In philosophy, the unmanifest (avyakta) is that which is not
directly perceptible to the sense organs (indriya-agocaram).
The objects that can be brought within the perceptible
powers of our sense organs are called the manifested
(vyakta). Arjuna was taught in his early studies of the
Vedas that the Supreme was unmanifest and all-
pervading. But he had, in the previous chapter, a personal
experience of the Divine Cosmic-Form. Naturally, the
determined prince, seeking to understand the right Path of
spiritual evolution, asks here a pertinent question as to
who is the better seeker --- is it the one who devotes
himself in love to the Lord-manifest, or he who, with
complete detachment from all external stimuli, meditates
with ease and poise upon the unmanifested-Infinite?
The question expresses the great controversy that exists
even today in the world. Can the Lord be meditated upon
and realised ultimately through idol worship? Can any
symbol represent HIM? Can a wave represent the ocean?
EXPLAINING THE PATH OF MEDITATION ON A
FORM REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DIVINE, KRISHNA
THE INFINITE, STARTS HIS DISCOURSE.
868
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Those who, fixing their mind on Me,
worship Me, ever steadfast and endowed with supreme faith,
these, in my opinion, are the best in YOGA.
In this very opening stanza, Krishna points out three
conditions that are absolutely necessary in order that
devotion unto the Lord may yield its promised dividend.
Generally, there is a feeling that the 'Path-of-Devotion' is
very easy. It is equally true to say that no chosen 'Path' is
difficult for the seeker who has chosen it. 'Paths' are
different only because of the vehicles employed; in a boat
we can never travel through the grand-trunk road, nor can
we sail over the waves in a plane, nor on a cycle dash at
60-miles an hour! There are limitations to each vehicle. But
progress is assured to the intelligent and the careful even
with any such vehicle. Similarly, for self-development,
each type of seeker, according to the vehicle available,
chooses either the 'Path-of-Devotion' or the 'Path-of-
Action' or the 'Path-of-Knowledge.' To each one of them,
his 'Path' is the easiest.
FIXING THEIR THOUGHTS ON ME --- Thought is the
content of our subtle body. Both the mind and intellect are
nothing but thoughts. It is not sufficient if they leisurely
wander around the concept of the Lord, but they have
actually to penetrate, delve into, merge, and ultimately
dissolve themselves to become the very ideal perfection
which the Lord represents. The word that is being used
here in the stanza (Aveshya) indicates not merely a
"THOUGHT CONTACT" but an actual "THOUGHT
869
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PENETRATION." In fact, human thought takes the form
of, gathers the fragrance of, and even puts on the glow of
the qualities in the objects of its contemplation. Thus,
when a devotee's thoughts gush forward in sincerity, in a
newly found urge of irrepressible love towards the Lord,
the devotee, as a personality, ends for the time being, and
himself acquires the glow and beauty of the Lord-of-his-
heart.
EVER SELF-CONTROLLED, WORSHIP ME --- The
second condition necessary for a devotee to accomplish
his evolution through the 'Path-of-Devotion' is that he
must have sufficient balance in himself to exercise regular
self-control while worshipping the Lord. The mind, by its
very nature, will always try to run wild from its objects of
contemplation, and the art of keeping the thoughts
balanced at its point-of-concentration is called self-control.
The Sanskrit term Upasana though it can be translated as
'worship', should not be misunderstood by the superficial
suggestion that automatically comes to us when we hear
the word 'worship.' True Upasana is an inward act of
attunement with the Higher Principle so as to get
ourselves completely merged with It.
WITH SUPREME FAITH --- Faith is generally understood
as "blind belief"... blind belief is not Shraddha. Shraddha is
"MY BELEIF IN SOMETHING I DO NOT KNOW, SO
THAT I MAY COME TO KNOW WHAT I BELIEVE IN."
Without this faculty developed in him, a devotee may not
870
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
succeed sufficiently in bringing about a self-divinisation in
himself even after years of practice.
Thus, three main conditions are enumerated in this stanza
as essential and unavoidable for one to become a true
devotee, viz., (1) Perfect faith, (2) Ever steadfast in
worship and (3) One's mind totally merged with the
concept of the Lord. If these are accomplished in anyone,
he is considered as the most steadfast devotee by the Lord.
THEN, ARE NOT THE OTHERS YOGIS? "WAIT; HEAR
NOW WHAT I HAVE TO SAY REGARDING THEM":
3. Those who worship the imperishable, the indefinable, the
unmanifest, the omnipresent, the unthinkable. the
unchangeable. the immovable and the eternal, . . .
4. Having restrained all the senses, even-minded everywhere,
rejoicing ever in the welfare of all beings --- verily theyalso come
unto Me.
In the previous stanza, the essential conditions under
which alone a devotee can practice contemplation upon a
Manifest-Form of the Lord to become a steadfast Yogi
were described. In these two stanzas, Lord Krishna is
trying to describe those who meditate upon the
Unmanifest-Form of the Lord.
871
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IMPERISHABLE (Akshara) --- All those that have forms
and qualities are substances and all substances are
perishable. The Imperishable is, therefore, that which has
no qualities. Qualities alone can be perceived, and it
implies that it is impossible for the sense organs to
perceive the Imperishable.
INDEFINABLE (Anirdeshyam) --- Definitions are always in
terms of perceived experiences and when a thing is
imperceptible, naturally, it cannot be defined and
distinguished from other things.
ALL-PERVADING (sarvatra-gam) --- The Infinite that has
no qualities, that is not manifest, that which is, therefore,
Indefinable, should necessarily be All-pervading and
existing everywhere. If the Supreme can be indicated as
not existing in any place, then the Supreme will have a
particular shape. And that which has a shape will perish.
UNTHINKABLE (Achintyam) --- That which can be
conceived of by a human mind will immediately become
the object of feelings and thoughts and since all objects are
perishable, the Imperishable must necessarily be
Inconceivable, Incomprehensible, and Unthinkable.
UNCHANGING (Kootasthah) --- The Self, the
Consciousness, remains unchanged even though it is the
substratum on which all changes constantly take place. '
Koota' in Sanskrit, is an "anvil." Just as the iron block in a
smithy's workshop, without itself undergoing any change,
872
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
allows other pieces of iron to be beaten out on it, and
changed into any shape; so too, the Consciousness allows
our personalities to grow well or ill in contact with It.
IMMOVABLE (Achalam) --- Motion is change in the time-
space system. A thing can never move in itself; it can do so
only to a point in space and time where it is not already.
Here, now, I remain in my chair. I can move to another
place to occupy it in the coming minute. But here and now
in my own chair, I cannot move in myself, since I pervade
the whole of me. The Infinite is All-pervading and there is
no point in space or time where It is not, and therefore, the
Infinite cannot move. It is here, there, everywhere; It has
the past, the present and the future IN it.
ETERNAL (Dhruvam) --- That which can change is a thing
that is conditioned by time and space. But the Supreme,
the Substratum of all, at all times and in all places, is the
One that supports the very play of time and space, and
therefore, these two factors cannot condition the Infinite.
Consciousness, which is the Infinite Self in us, is the same
everywhere and at all times --- in our childhood, youth
and old age, in all places and at all times --- and in all
conditions of joy and sorrow or success and failure. It is
only when we come down to the levels of our intellect,
mind, and body, that we step into Einstein's world with its
Relativity Theory in the play of time and space. The
Supreme is unconditioned by time; It is the ruler of time. It
is Eternal.
873
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
We must note that all these terms used here are
expressions borrowed from our Upanishads to indicate that
which provides the Eternal substratum for the ever-
changing universe of names and forms, behaviours and
happenings, perceptions and feelings, thoughts and
experiences. Meditation upon the Lord, symbolised-in-
the-form, demands three unavoidable conditions.
HAVING RESTRAINED ALL THE SENSES --- To
dissipate our energies through the sense organs is the
vulgar hobby of the thoughtless mortal. A seeker, who is
aspiring to reach the summit of Perfection and rule over
the state of deathless joy, must necessarily curtail such
dissipations and redirect the energies so conserved for the
higher flight. The sense organs are the real gateways
through which the disturbing world of plurality steals in,
to storm our inner bosom and plunge us into destruction.
It is again through the organs-of-action that the mind
gushes out into the world-of-objects. These two
transactions break up our harmonious equipoise and
steady balance. Krishna rightly emphasizes here that, if a
meditator is to succeed in the 'Path-of-Meditation' he must
cultivate a habit of living with his senses in control.
ALWAYS EQUANIMOUS --- The second of the conditions
that has been prescribed here by the Lord for a successful
meditator is his intellectual equanimity in all conditions
and experiences. It is very foolish indeed for a thinker to
hope for a condition in life, wherein no disturbance from
the outer world can reach him to distract his meditation.
874
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Such a perfect condition is impossible. The things of the
world in themselves and in their patterns keep on
changing. In such a kaleidoscopic design of existence, it is
indeed unintelligent to expect any desirable system to
remain continuously for the benefit of a seeker's steady
practice. Such a thing is impossible. In the world-of-
change, therefore, a seeker must discover his own balance
and equipoise, by controlling his intellectual evaluations,
mental attachments and physical contacts with the world
outside.
The intelligent relationship maintained by a seeker
towards the world outside, whereby he experiences a
uniform steadiness in himself, in spite of the mad revelry
of things and beings around him, is called the condition of
equanimity. He, who has developed the right sense of
discrimination, can easily watch for and see the golden
chord of Beauty that holds together all that is enchanting
and grotesque constituting the outer world. This capacity
is called Sama-buddhi.
My child may be dirty at one moment, mischievous at
another; screaming in the morning, laughing in the noon;
bullying in the evening and wild at night! Yet, through all
such conditions, the father in me sees but one and the
same son, therefore, I give my love equally in all these
different manifestations of my own son. This is a loving
father's Sama-buddhi. In the same way, true seeker learns
to recognise the Lord-of-his-heart in grim tragedies, in the
pleasant comedies, in the tremendous successes, in the
875
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sighing sorrows and in the disappointing failures in his
own day-to-day life. Therefore, he becomes equanimous
intellectually.
INTENT ON THE WELFARE OF ALL BEINGS ---
Enumerating the third of the qualifications necessary for a
successful meditator, the Lord says that he should ever be
self-dedicated in serving at his best, to all beings. It is
impossible for anyone, as long as he is in the embodiment,
to give all his mind and intellect, at all times, towards the
higher contemplation. He must necessarily come in
contact with the world and react to it. In all such activities,
a seeker should be, by the very nature of his philosophy,
one who is ever devoted in tirelessly serving the entire
living kingdom. Love for all beings becomes his creed.
Thus, if the meditators, fixing their mind upon the
Imperishable, the Unmanifest, are able to control their
sense organs, keep themselves equanimous and make it
their nature to serve others, they too, "REACH ME
ALONE." Krishna declares that they too reach the same
goal, the Supreme Self.
The question as raised by Arjuna is rather of a
controversial nature, while Krishna's answer to it is a
declaration of an incontrovertible truth. Here, the great
divine philosopher points out how both the Paths take the
practitioner to one and the same goal, and the same
general rules of conduct in their dealing with the world
are here clearly prescribed for both of them. Whether the
876
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
devotee is seeking his spiritual unfoldment through
meditation upon a personal, or an impersonal God, the
result achieved, it is shown, remains the same, if the
disciplines required of him are all fully and faithfully
followed.
BUT, GENERALLY SPEAKING TO THE MAJORITY,
THE LORD ADDS:
5. Greater is their trouble whose minds are set on the
'Unmanifest' ; for the goal, the 'Unmanifest, ' is very hard for
the embodied to reach.
After explaining how the goal reached by all meditators is
one and the same Supreme Perfection, Lord Krishna tries
to compare the two incomparable 'Paths', both of equal
efficacy and merit. He says "GREATER IS THE TOIL OF
THOSE WHOSE THOUGHTS ARE FIXED ON THE
UNMANIFEST." This declaration, when read as such and
in itself, is not only an advocacy of the 'Path-of-Devotion'
to a PERSONAL GOD, but almost amounts to a positive
condemnation of meditation upon the Formless. Such an
erroneous and misleading interpretation will render the
Geeta a scripture that contradicts the 'eternal wisdom' of
the Upanishads. And yet, there are vocal champions of
devotion (Bhakti), who quote this half stanza to beguile the
faithful!
877
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The first line is commented upon and elucidated by the
following line in the stanza. Lord Krishna explains why it
is hard ordinarily for seekers to contemplate upon the
Formless. "THE UNMANIFEST IS VERY HARD INDEED
FOR THE EMBODIED TO REACH." The crucial word in
the stanza is 'embodied.' It is often very directly understood
to mean "all those who have a physical structure." The
absurdity of such an understanding would become
evident if we follow the natural corollary of such an
interpretation. If all those who are having a physical body
can meditate only upon the form of the Lord, then it
follows that pure meditation upon the Formless is to be
undertaken only after the body is dropped and the seeker
is dead.
Shri Shankaracharya, therefore, clearly explains that the
"EMBODIED" means "those who are attached to their
bodies." Sunk in flesh, if one personality lives only a life of
sensuality and satisfaction of one's body-cravings, one will
find it too difficult to take to steady and continuous
meditation upon the subtle theme of the Infinite, Formless
and All-pervading. An old man whose vision is lost and
whose hands are shaky, may find it very difficult to thread
a needle; so too, a mind and intellect agitated, panting and
restless, suffering from desire-plays, are not vehicles that
can successfully fly beyond the frontiers of names and
forms to the endless Spiritual Glory.
In short, to the majority of us, meditation upon the Lord,
as expressed in the Universe, is easier and more profitable.
878
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Man can worship the myriad forms through service
undertaken in a spirit of worship and divine dedication.
By doing so, the body-attachments and sense-appetites get
purged from his inner make-up and his mind ecomes
subtle enough to conceive and contemplate upon the
Formless and the Imperishable Unmanifest.
EVEN THOUGH, LATER ON, WE SHALL MEET
WITHIN THIS CHAPTER, THE WAY OF LIFE
PRESCRIBED FOR MEN CONTEMPLATING UPON THE
'MANIFEST, ' HEREUNDER WE SHALL FIND THE
DISCIPLINES IN LIFE FOR A STUDENT WHO IS
TRYING TO STEADY THE MIND THROUGH HIS
DEVOTION FOR THE 'MANIFEST-LORD':
6. But those who worship Me, renouncing all actions in Me,
regarding Me as the Supreme Goal, meditating on Me with
single-minded devotion (YOGA) . . .
7. For them, whose minds are set on Me, verily I become, ere-
long, O Partha, the Saviour, (to save them) out of the ocean of
finite experiences; the SAMSARA.
Here Krishna prescribes certain definite conditions to be
faithfully followed by all meditators upon the Form-of-
the-Lord, and concludes that those who are following His
instructions fully, will be saved from their mortal
limitations, by the Lord Himself, on whose Form they are
879
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
contemplating. A careful study of these conditions will
show us how the devotee grows mentally to stature so
divine and high that, thereafter he needs no help from
anyone at all. But, in the beginning, a seeker needs some
assurances from his teacher in order to instil in him the
required self-confidence to start his practices.
THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME, RENOUNCING ALL
ACTIONS IN ME --- To renounce all our actions to an
INSTITUTION, to an IDEA or to a POWER, is to end our
individual limitations and identify ourselves with that for
which we renounce. Thus, an ordinary man, as
ambassador of his country, becomes a mighty personality
in the foreign courts, because he talks, acts, thinks and
expresses the will of an entire people. Similarly, when a
devotee of the Infinite Lord surrenders himself totally at
His feet and acts as a messenger, or as a representative of
the Will of the Lord, he becomes, not only divinely
'dynamic,' but in and through his own activities, aware of
the presence and grace of the Universal Spirit.
REGARDING ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL --- A dancer
never forgets the rhythm of the drum which accompanies
her steps. A musician is ever conscious of the background
hum. Similarly, a devotee is advised not take up religion
as a part-time entertainment, or as a temporary escapism,
but to consider the Lord as the Supreme Goal to be
achieved in and through life. In short, we are advised that
in order to ascend to the Higher summits of cultural
perfection, it is necessary that we direct all our contacts,
880
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
transactions, and experiences in our life, towards the
achievement of this cumulative goal of Self-Perfection, as
symbolised in the Lord of our heart.
WITH UNSWERVING YOGA --- All attempts with which
we develop our mental attunement with any chosen State
of Perfection constitute Yoga. To lift our minds from its
present agitations and wasteful tendencies towards a
greater goal of ampler joy and fuller wisdom is Yoga. This
faculty of Yoga is in everyone of us. At all times we are
practising it. But the results of Yoga will depend upon the
goal towards which we are heaving forward;
unfortunately, ours is not generally a Divine Goal; to
strive for the sense-enjoyments is called Bhoga.
Ordinarily, our goal keeps on changing and we reach
nowhere even though our struggle is consistent. If a
holiday-maker has two spots in view, and he cannot come
to a decision as to which place he wants to visit, then he
can reach neither of them. He will be in a helpless state of
confusion, travelling up and down the road, reaching
nowhere, and wasting his time and energy. 'Anya' means
'other'; 'Ananya' means 'without otherness.' Krishna is
advising here Ananya Yoga, meaning a Yoga in which the
goal is ever steady and our mind has no sense of
'otherness' about it.
It may be noted here that mental disintegration can come
both because of the 'otherness' in our goal, and because of
881
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the mind wandering into other channels of
preoccupations.
Thus those (a) who have renounced all actions in Me (b)
who regard Me as the Supreme Goal and (c) who, with a
single-pointed mind and goal strive, are the best of My
devotees, when their striving is constituted of meditation
(Dhyana) and worship (Upasana). We have already
indicated that Upasana is not merely meditation upon a
goal, but becoming, in an active way, one with the Goal
contemplated upon. At-one-ment with the goal is the
meditator's aim and fulfilment.
Enumerating the conditions necessary for a devotee at his
seat of meditation, Krishna assures him that he need not
wonder how he will go beyond the shores of sorrows,
agitations, and imperfections, which are the lot of all
mortals. "I SHALL BE THEIR SAVIOUR" is a divine
assurance and an infinite guarantee. It is possible that
seekers may become rather impatient when even after
months and years of practice, they do not come anywhere
near any spiritual experience.
The Lord's assurance also indicates the time limit; He says
that He will save the seeker from his own imperfection
'ere-long' (nachirat).
TO THOSE WHOSE MIND IS SET ON ME --- The mind
generally takes the form of the object it contemplates
upon. When an integrated mind-intellect-equipment of a
882
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
devotee, through constant practice, gains the capacity of
engaging itself entirely on the concept of the Lord, to the
exclusion of all agitations and undivine thoughts, the
entire mind assumes the stature of the Infinite. It is the
mind that gives us the hallucination of our egocentric
limitations, and again, it is the mind that rediscovers the
Infinitude. Bondage and liberation are both for the mind.
The Self is ever free; ever liberated; never bound.
8. Fix your mind on Me only, place your intellect in Me; then,
(thereafter) you shall, no doubt, live in Me alone.
Meditation is not a physical act but it is a subtle art
developed by the inner personality in man. Every seeker
must be experiencing that what his intellect accepts, his
heart does not appreciate; and what his heart craves for,
the intellect laughs at. To bring both the head and the
heart to the same Enchanting Form of thrilled satisfaction,
would be the secret of harnessing the entire inner man to
the spiritual effort. The technique of this art is beautifully
explained in this stanza.
FIX THY MIND ON ME ALONE --- The mind cannot
contemplate on any theme that cannot be conditioned by
the senses. Therefore, by meditation upon the enchanting
form of the Immortal Flute-player, the human mind can
readily be made to rest entirely at the feet of the form. The
Lord, being all-pervading, is at once the Divine Grace
behind all names and forms. The mind of a devotee cannot
883
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
wander to any place where he is not reminded of the smile
of the Crowned Cowherd-boy!
Merely to ruminate over a decorated marble symbol of the
Eternal Child is not in itself sufficient food for the inner
personality of man. The intellectual aspect in us is starved,
although the heart nestles in satisfaction at the soft feet of
the Lord. Any over-development will bring about an ugly
situation; perfection is harmony and uniform growth.
Therefore, technically, the Geeta rightly advises that the
devotee must bring his discriminating intellect to pierce
through the stony idol and contact the pulsating Truth it
represents.
PLACE THE INTELLECT IN ME --- To contact thereby
the cosmic total-intellect which is the Lord's equipment.
Every one of us, at any given moment, is the sum-total of
what we think and what we feel. If our minds are resting
on the Lord and our intellects have dived into the very
depths of the Infinite, our individualities end and we
merge to become one with the Infinite, the all-pervading.
Therefore, the Lord says, "THEREAFTER YOU SHALL
LIVE IN ME."
This statement may look as an exaggeration for the finite
mortal, who is standing agitated and shy at the gateway of
the Temple-of-Truth. In this habitual concept that he is a
finite mortal entity --- pressed under a thousand
limitations, suffering from a host of imperfections, and
884
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
persecuted by an army of despairs --- he fails to accept
that he can rediscover himself to be Himself, the ever-
Divine. Therefore, as a kindly teacher, Lord Krishna
reassures him by affirming directly, "no doubt" (Na-
samshayah).
A TYPICAL MAN OF THE WORLD, ARJUNA, LOOKS
UP TO THE LORD, DECLARING HIS ABJECT
HELPLESSNESS TO ACCOMPLISH THESE TWO
SEEMINGLY SIMPLE, BUT PRACTICALLY IMPOSSIBLE
CONDITIONS OF MEDITATION. AS AN
ALTERNATIVE, THE LORD SAYS:
9. If you are unable to fix your mind steadily upon Me, then by
the 'YOGA -of constant-practice, ' seek to reach Me, O
Dhananjaya.
The technique of self-unfoldment was irrevocably
declared by the Lord in the previous verse. The seeker has
to fix his mind totally at the feet of the Lord and bring his
intellect to play upon and rip open the significance of the
Form-Divine. This double act needs an extremely subtle
intellect and single-pointedness of the mind. Perhaps
Arjuna felt, as any average man would, that this 'Path' was
almost impossible for him to pursue successfully. The
kindly teacher in Krishna, reading this despair from the
face of his disciple, tries to give him an alternative method
of Self-unfoldment.
885
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
IF YOU ARE UNABLE TO FIX YOUR THOUGHTS
STEADILY ON ME --- Then the only practical method
would be to pursue the Yoga-of-constant-practice
(Abhyasa-Yoga). This Yoga-of-practice was earlier described
(in VI-26) as: "Wherever the mind wanders, restless, from
there let him subdue it and bring it under the sway of the
Self alone."
In short, whenever a meditator tries to meditate by fixing
his mind upon a chosen point-of-concentration, the fickle
mind will always try to run wild into dissimilar thought-
channels. The advice here is to gather all the rays of the
mind, whenever they wander away from their main point-
of-concentration, and focus them all again and again on
the Divine Form.
Every meditator must admit that the mind steadily fails to
balance on, for any length of time, totally engaging itself
with the theme of its contemplation. That the mind runs
away into a wild wool-gathering is not in itself such a
tragedy as that when the meditator himself gets abducted
by the mind and unconsciously follows it into the fields of
ready distractions. The Yogeshwara (Krishna) is only
advising us not to get enticed away by the mind from our
divine pursuit.
In order to gather the dissipated and riotous mental rays
and to focus them at the point-of-concentration, the
meditator must develop a capacity to stand by himself,
886
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and in himself, apart from his wandering mind. If we
identify ourselves with the mind, wherever the mind takes
us, we also must go. Therefore, in order to control the
mind, the meditator must stand apart from his mind,
identifying himself with that power in him which
possesses the ability to rule over and direct his mental
energies. This direct controller and ruler of the mind is the
higher faculty in man called the intellect. With our
discriminating capacity alone can we rule over the lesser
faculties of the mind in ourselves.
This alternative method suggested by the Lord is to help
those who are not able to accomplish the most direct 'Path'
indicated in the previous stanza. By striving hard in
Abhyasa-Yoga for a length of time, our mind gets so well
disciplined that we will be able to practise the immediate
method of self-unfoldment advised in the earlier couplet.
IF THIS ALSO IS NOT POSSIBLE, THEN:
10. If you are unable even to practise ABHYASA-YOGA, be
you intent on performing actions for My sake; even by doing
actions for My sake, you shall attain perfection.
The thoroughness of the Hindu scriptures consists in
suggesting varying and exhaustive techniques of self-
development. Psychologically, the technique is so
analytical that the more one studies it, the more one is
convinced of the 'path.' There is no "do it or else to hell"
887
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sort of threat ever seen anywhere in our great Shastras.
Any young man, open to intellectual conviction and
scientific appraisal, can get totally convinced of the Hindu
way of life.
If a meditator is agitated and wild in his mental
personality he will be incapacitated even to perform the"
Yoga-of-practice" (Abhyasa-Yoga). Here, Krishna advises
him not to struggle hard and thereby bring about
avoidable and unnecessary mental repressions and
psychological suppressions. The inner personality is a
million times more delicate than an unopened flower-bud
and to hasten its unfoldment is to ruin for ever its beauty
and fragrance. Meditation is only an attempt on our part
to create the necessary conditions, most favourable for an
early blossoming of the greater man in us. Naturally,
therefore, one who is incapable of performing one kind of
practice must be given an alternative method of self-
development.
An individual will find it easy to gather his mind from its
chosen fields of dissipation only when the mind is gliding
NOW AND THEN into unworthy channels along the
impression-routes created by his own past actions. But if a
seeker is too full of such impressions and is so extremely
extrovert in nature as to make the practice of
concentration futile, then he is advised to surrender all his
actions unto the Lord in a spirit of dedication. In doing so,
even the most extrovert man will remember the Lord all
through his day's activities.
888
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This is the method unconsciously adopted and silently
pursued by all fathers towards their new-born child.
Every son is born to his father as a stranger. But, in a
couple of months, the father's love for the child increases,
and as years roll by, it gathers itself into a magnitude
wherein the father lives literally in the son. This happens
because, after the birth of the son, all actions and
experiences of the father are influenced by background
memory of the son, i. e., an unconscious spirit of
dedication towards him.
Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, is most practical in showing
here the 'Path' to an ordinary average man. It gives a hope
even to the most extrovert among us. It is indeed a royal
'Path' to the majority of us. Just as a firm's representative,
while talking, always associates himself with his firm and
says "we shall try to supply --- we are producing --- we are
not responsible," etc., and he identifies himself with the
great manufacturers, as if he is one of the directors of the
firm, although, in fact, he is only a low-paid local agent.
Similarly, if anyone of us were really to entertain in our
mind the firm idea that we are the agents of the Divine,
executing His will in all our external activities, then, not
only will our mind thereby be made to contemplate on the
Lord continuously, but we shall be drawing from
ourselves miraculous powers of efficiency, organisational
dexterity, and confident courage in all our undertakings,
big or small.
889
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
To a student of the ancient Vedic lore, as Arjuna was, this
statement, seemingly so simple, may bring along with it a
doubt as to its real potency. The orthodox are always
suspicious of an unorthodox declaration, even if it be
made by the greatest living man of the era, or even by a
Divine manifestation. Therefore, Krishna assures his
readers of the efficacy of the 'Path' advocated in the
second line: "EVEN BY DOING ACTIONS FOR MY SAKE
YOU SHALL ATTAIN PERFECTION."
Even while boiling some water, we are apt to call it as
"making tea." Though factually it is a lie, it is the whole
truth, for, once the water is boiled it does not take much
time, nor great labour to make tea. And therefore,
whenever water is boiled with the intention of making tea,
we generally name the initial act itself by the final goal.
Similarly, by the art of dedicating ourselves totally unto
the Lord, in and through all our daily activities and
contacts with the outer world, we will be developing, in
ourselves, the divine vasanas, and during our actions we
will be exhausting the existing impressions. Such a
prepared mind gets properly tuned up for the Yoga-of-
practice and soon it gains sufficient balance and equipoise
to contemplate steadily upon the Truth and get itself
merged therein.
AND SUPPOSING THERE BE ONE TO WHOM EVEN
THIS IS NOT POSSIBLE?
890
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
11. If you are unable to do even this, then taking refuge in Me,
self-controlled, renounce the fruits-of-all-actions.
In the previous stanza, we were advised to act in the
world outside, renouncing totally our ego, or the sense of
a separate, individualised existence. To the strongly
egoistic and self-opinionated one, this is not an easy task.
Such a man is extremely agitated (rajasic), with the force of
low impulses (tamas) poisoning his personality-structure.
Even to such seekers, belonging to the lowest conceivable
type, the Geeta has a 'path' of advise. Ordinarily, such
persons would have been a despair to all religions. Even
such chronic cases are taken up by the Geeta, treated
considerately, with simple methods, and finally elevated
to the highest personality-lustre and efficiency.
If self-dedication unto the Lord, in all activities, is
impossible, such individuals are advised here an equally
powerful alternative, viz., at least to "ABANDON THE
FRUITS-OF-ACTIONS, AND, TAKING REFUGE IN ME,
BE SELF-CONTROLLED" in all actions.
Lord Krishna seems to hate all those who are MERE wage-
earners. This is not the Bourgeois-contempt for the
labourer, or the higher-class vanity that makes some look
down upon the sweating wage-earners. In a socialistic
pattern of society, especially in an era of the welfare State,
any educated man must entertain this Krishna-impatience
with every worker in the nation who works only for his
wage or profit. In such a socialistic scheme of national life,
891
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a worker, who works only for "higher wages, with less
hours of work, and with maximum inefficiency" is a
criminal who deserves to be punished, in any society. It is
this modern attitude, which we see reflected in Krishna's
condemnation of all those who work in the world "merely
for-the-fruit" --- meaning pay or wages.
The "fruit-of-an-action" is the action of the present-moment
maturing itself in a future-period of time. Today, if I
plough and sow the seeds, the profit in my harvest will
come only after a couple of months. And supposing a
farmer broods over the amount of profit that he is to get
out of the cultivation and thus wastes his time and energy
in dreaming over the possibilities of a success or a failure
of the crops, he will surely be an utter failure. Even
though this fact is very well known, the majority of us
waste our PRESENT chances, opportunities and time in
brooding over the FUTURE. All our energies get wasted in
our anxieties and fears of a horrid future which has not
yet come --- and which may not at all materialise! Krishna
urges us here only to curb these wasteful imaginations
and to live vitally, sincerely, fully and dynamically in the
PRESENT, shutting off all negative imaginations
regarding the FUTURE. Even this act can integrate our
personality and make it single-pointed and strong.
The above three verses give us three alternatives which
are in fact only three different types of mental medicines
to cure the mind of its various distractions. All of us are, to
a certain extent, extrovert. We differ from each other only
892
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in the thickness of the Vasana-layers that we entertain in
our inner-equipment. When a brass vessel is slightly dim,
an 'ash-treatment' is sufficient to polish it; if it is with a
thicker layer of oxide, some 'acid-dipping' will be needed.
Similarly, here, if the mind is thinly coated with Vasanas,
the slight distractions created by them can be controlled
by the Yoga-of-practice. But if the layer of Vasanas is thick,
then it can be treated with the Yoga-of action performed in
a spirit of Divine dedication. If the mind is shackled with
still thicker layers of Vasanas, then the seeker is advised 'to
curb his imagination' and act in the world (Karma-phala-
tyaga). As I said earlier, nowhere in the world's spiritual
literature do we see such an exhaustive treatment of the
different 'Paths' for self-development, as in the Geeta.
BUT THEY MUST BE PERFORMED SERIALLY, TO
INDICATE THAT THESE ARE NOT TO BE PURSUED
TOGETHER. NOW THE LORD EXTOLS
THE ABANDONING-OF-THE-FRUITS OF ALL
ACTIONS:
12. 'Knowledge' is indeed better than 'practice' ; 'meditation' is
better than 'knowledge' ; 'renunciation of the fruits-of-actions'
is better than 'meditation' ; peace immediately follows
'renunciation. '
When a divine philosopher gives a discourse for the
benefit of a disciple who is confused and broken-down, it
893
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is not sufficient if he merely enumerates the dry
philosophical truths; he must so beautifully arrange his
ideas that the very scheme of the discourse must help the
student to gather all the ideas together in a bunch. The
stanza, now under review, gives us one of the typical
examples in Krishna's discourse wherein he directly
makes an attempt to systematise his theoretical
disquisitions into a well-arranged pattern of thought.
Here we find a sequence of ideas, arranged in a
descending order of importance. When once this ladder-
of-ideas is brought completely within a seeker's
comprehension and when he learns the art of moving up
and down this ladder, he will master almost all the salient
points so far expounded in this chapter.
BETTER INDEED IS KNOWLEDGE THAN PRACTICE ---
Spiritual practices are not mere physical acts but are
disciplines that should ultimately tune up our mental and
intellectual levels. The inner personality cannot be
persuaded to toe the line with the physical acts of
devotion unless the practitioner has a correct grasp of
what he is doing. An intellectual conversion is a pre-
requisite to force the mind to act in the right spirit and to
gain a perfect attunement with the physical act. A correct
and exhaustive knowledge of what we are doing, and why
we are doing it, is an unavoidable pre-condition for
making our Yoga fruitful. Therefore, it is said here that a
knowledge of the psychological, intellectual and spiritual
894
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
implications of our practices is greater in importance than
the very external Yogic acts, or 'devotional performances.'
MEDITATION IS SUPERIOR TO KNOWLEDGE --- More
important than mere KNOWLEDGE is meditation upon
the very 'knowledge' so gathered. The technical
explanation --- of the why and the wherefore of religious
practices --- can be more easily learnt than understood. To
convert our learning into our understanding, there must
be necessarily a process of intellectual assimilation and
absorption. This cannot be accomplished by a mere factual
learning of the word-meanings. The students will have to
understand, in a hearty enthusiasm, the very meaning of
the Shastra, and this is possible only through long,
subjective, independent ponderings over the significant
terms in the Shastra-declarations. The process of inward
assimilation of knowledge can take place only through
meditation. Hence, in the hierarchy of importance,
"meditation" has been give a greater place than the
"KNOWLEDGE OF THE TECHNIQUE."
BETTER THAN MEDITATION IS THE ABANDON-
MENT OF FRUITS-OF-ACTION --- Meditation is an
attempt of the intellect to fly from the fields of its present
knowledge to a yonder destination of a better
understanding. In this flight to a vaster field, the intellect
must have the necessary energy and equipoise. Meditation
can never be possible for an individual in whom all
energies and steadiness of mind are shattered by the
agitations created by his own ruinous imaginations of the
895
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
future. In our discourses upon the previous stanza, we
have already shown how our anxiety for the future
generally depletes our vitality to face the present. All
fruits-of-actions definitely belong to the FUTURE, and to
be over-anxious about them is to invite a lot of idle
agitations into our bosom. Stormed by these agitations, we
lose all our equipoise and such an individual has no
ability to meditate upon and thereby assimilate the silent
significance of the great Shastras. Therefore, Krishna here
gives a greater place of importance in his ladder-of-ideas
to "THE RENUNCIATION OF THE FRUITS-OF-
ACTION."
As a foot-note to his own declaration, he adds how
renunciation of our anxiety for the future immediately
brings about a healthy condition within ourselves.
"PEACE IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWS RENUNCIATION."
In fact, in Hinduism, renunciation (Sannyasa) is nothing
other than "giving up all our clinging attachments to the
pleasures arising out of our contact with the external sense
objects."
As a result of this renunciation, therefore, a dynamic
quietude comes to pervade the bosom in which the
intellect can meditate upon the knowledge of the Shastras,
and thereby understand the ways of self-development as
explained therein. And when, with this knowledge, one
uses one's seat of meditation, one is assured of definite
success and steady progress.
896
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WITH REFERENCE TO THOSE WHO ARE
MEDITATING UPON THE IMPERISHABLE, THE
INFINITE, THE LORD PRESCRIBES A CERTAIN
MENTAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONDUCT WHICH
FORMS THE DIRECT MEANS TO PERFECTION:
13. He who hates no creature, who is friendly and
compassionate to all, who is free from attachment and egoism,
balanced in pleasure and pain, and forgiving . . .
14. Ever content, steady in meditation, self-controlled, possessed
of firm conviction, with mind and intellect dedicated to Me, he,
My devotee, is dear to me.
In the following seven stanzas (XII-13 to 19), in six
different sections, Lord Krishna enumerates the
characteristic features of a Man-of-Perfection, and thereby
prescribes the correct mode-of-conduct and the way-of-life
for all seekers. In these stanzas, the Yogeshwara has very
well succeeded in painting the picture of a true devotee
for Arjuna's understanding. As a true painter would again
and again step back from his canvas to judge his own
production and then go forward to it to lay a few more
strokes to bring out his theme into a more effective relief
on his canvas, so too Krishna is trying in these seven
stanzas to paint the mental beauty and the intellectual
equipoise of a true devotee, along with his relationship
with the world around him. No other part in the whole
Geeta can be compared with the beauty of expression that
897
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
we have in these stanzas, except perhaps, the description
of "the Man-of-Steady-Wisdom (II-55 to 68) that we read
in the second chapter.
Moral rules and ethical codes of behaviour are in
Hinduism not arbitrary commandments thrust upon its
followers by a Son of God, or by a Messiah. These rules of
conduct are copied from the behaviour of God-men who
had attained the spiritual perfection and had actually
lived among us. Seekers are those who are striving hard to
attain the spiritual experience of those Saints and Seers. A
devotee who is trying to attune himself with these Masters
of Yoga should necessarily start at least copying their
external behaviour and mental beauties, which constitute
the moral and ethical rules prescribed in our religion.
Eleven noble qualities are indicated in the above two
stanzas which constitute the OPENING SECTION.
Everyone of them declares a moral phase in the character
of Man-of-Perfection. One who has realised that the Spirit
everywhere is one and the same, and that the Spirit-in-All
alone is his own Self, cannot, thereafter, afford to hate
anyone, because, from his vision-of-understanding, there
is no one who is other than Him! No living man can afford
to hate his own right hand because he is in it too. Nobody
hates himself!
His attitude to all living creatures will be friendly, and he
is ever compassionate to all. He offers security of life to all
beings. He cannot regard anything as his and he is
898
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
completely free from the notion of egoism. Even-minded
in pain and pleasure, he remains supremely unaffected
even when beaten or abused. Always content, he
discovers a flawless infinite joy in himself whether he
obtains even the means of his bodily sustenance or not.
Steadfast in his meditation, self-controlled and firm in his
resolve, he lives on joyously, his mind and intellect "ever
centered in Me." "SUCH A PERFECT, DEVOTED YOGI,"
THE LORD SAYS, "IS DEAR TO ME."
The truth expressed in the stanza earlier, "I am very dear
to the Man-to-Wisdom and he is dear to Me" (VII-17), is
being more elaborately elucidated in all these seven verses
of this chapter.
MOREOVER:
15. He by whom the world is not agitated (affected) , and who
cannot be agitated by the world, who is freed from joy, envy,
fear, and anxiety --- he is dear to me.
This stanza constitutes the SECOND SECTION in which
again Lord Krishna enumerates three more characteristic
features of a real devotee.
"HE BY WHOM THE WORLD IS NOT AGITATED" --- A
Man-of-Perfection is one who will not create any
agitations in the world around him. Where the Sun is,
there cannot be any darkness, where the peaceful Master
899
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of Equanimity and Perfection dwells, he, by the intrinsic
divinity in him, creates, as it were, an atmosphere of
serene joy and endless peace around him; and even those,
who are agitated in the world, will suffer no more from
such agitations when they approach such a master-mind,
and enjoy a peace in themselves. In fact, the world
irresistibly rushes to such a saint to bask in his brilliance
and comes to experience the joy which he wafts all around
him!
"WHO CANNOT BE AGITATED BY THE WORLD" ---
Not only does a Man-of-Perfection quieten the very world
around him, into a dynamic peace, but also the world,
however chaotic, revolting, boisterous, and vengeful it
may be, cannot create any agitations in him. The world-of-
objects will almost always be in a state of flux, and its
maddening death-dance cannot bring even a whiff of its
storms to disturb the calm serenity of the saint. He is
made of stronger mettle and his life is built upon surer
foundations.
The floating reeds dance on the surface of the sea but the
light-house that is built on the rocks beneath stands erect
and motionless, watching the smooth sea turning rough
with the rise of the tidal waves. The personality of a
perfect-man is rooted in his realisation of the deeper
substratum of life; and, since he is not attached to the
superficial conditions of matter and its playful magic, any
amount of wild agitations outside cannot bring any
disturbance to his inner equipoise. In and through the
900
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
battling circumstances, he perceives the changeless
ground --- he hears the harmony that runs through the
various discordant notes in life around.
"HE IS COMPLETELY FREED FROM" all the usual causes
for inward agitations such as "JOY, ENVY, FEAR AND
ANXIETY." A devotee of this type, ever peaceful with
himself and the world, who rules over the circumstances
and never yields to be victimised by them, who has
crossed over the usual weaknesses of the mortal heart ---
such a devotee "IS DEAR TO ME."
CONTINUING THE SAME TOPIC THE LORD
DECLARES:
16. He who is free from wants, pure, alert, unconcerned,
untroubled, renouncing all undertakings (or commencements) --
- he who is (thus) devoted to Me, is dear to Me.
This stanza represents the THIRD SECTION, which
throws more light upon the picture of the perfect-devotee
as conceived by the Lord Himself. Already in the above
two sections, fourteen indications were given and to that
total picture are added in this section six subtler items.
" FREE FROM DEPENDENCE " (Anapekshah) --- A true
devotee no more depends upon either the objects of the
world outside, or their pattern, or their relationships with
himself. An ordinary man discovers his peace and joy
901
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
only in the world-of-objects available for him, their
conditions, and their arrangements around him. When the
right type of object is in the right pattern courting him
favourably, a man of the world feels temporarily thrilled
and joyous. But a real devotee is completely independent
of the world outside and he draws his inspiration,
equanimity and joyous ecstasy from a source, deep within
himself.
"WHO IS PURE" (Shuchih) --- Dirt has no place anywhere
within or without a true devotee. One who is aspiring to
reach perfection will necessarily be so well-disciplined
physically that he will be clean not only in his relationship
with others but even in the very condition and
arrangement of his belongings around him. It is very well
known that the condition of a man's table or shelf, and the
cleanliness of his apparel, can give a great insight into the
mental nature, discipline and culture of that man. Great
emphasis has been laid in India on this physical purity,
not only in the person of the man but also of his contacts
in the world. Without external purity, internal purification
will be but a vague dream, an idle hope, a despairing
vision.
"ALERT" (Dakshah) --- To be alert always becomes the
second nature of an integrated person. Enthusiasm is the
key to success in any undertaking. A dynamic person is
not one who slips in his behaviour or action. He is
mentally agile and intellectually vigorous. Since there is
no dissipation in him, he is ever on his toes to spring
902
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
forward to activity, once he determines to shoulder any
endeavour. If we observe the degree of idleness,
carelessness, and ugliness in execution of any work, from
which all religious persons are suffering, we can
understand how far Hinduism has wandered away from
its pristine glory!
UNCONCERNED (Udaseenah) --- It is not difficult for one
to observe many devotees in this land who have resigned
themselves to a state of unexpressed sorrow, because they
have been cheated by others, ill-treated by society, and
persecuted by the community. The foolish devotees think
that they will be unconcerned about these outrages
practiced on them and then their own devotion for the
Lord must prove to themselves a wretched liability, rather
than a positive gain! Philosophy misunderstood can easily
end in the suicide of the community.
The "unconcerned attitude" is only meant here to
economise our mental energies. In human life, small
difficulties, simple illnesses, discomforts, wants etc., are
but natural. To exaggerate their importance and strive to
escape from them all is to enter into a life-long struggle of
adjustments. In all such instances, the student is warned
not to squander away his mental energies but to conserve
them by overlooking these little pin-pricks of life in an
attitude of utter indifference towards them.
FREE FROM TREMBLING --- The inward tremors are
experienced only when any burning desire has conquered
903
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
us completely. Once victimised by a desire or fascination
for an object, the individual personality becomes
tremulous in fear that its desire may not be fulfilled. A
true seeker is one, who never allows the inner person in
him to enter into any such fears or agitations.
RENOUNCING EVERY UNDERTAKING --- In Sanskrit
"Aarambha" means "beginning." "To end all beginnings,"
does not mean "not to undertake anything." This literal
translation has made the majority of Hindus incompetent
idlers and our religion has been criticized as glorifying
idleness as a divine ideal! The deeper suggestions are
overlooked. To perceive any definite beginning in an
undertaking, the individual actor must have a solid and
gross egoistic claim that he had begun it himself. He must
have the strong feeling that he is beginning an activity, for
the purpose of gaining a definite goal, whereby he will be
fulfilling a specific desire of his, or will thereby be gaining
a positive profit. One who is a seeker of the Divine,
striving to reach the higher cultural perfections, must
renounce this egoistic sense of self-importance and work
on in the world.
No undertaking in our life, in fact, is a new act that has an
independent beginning or end. All actions in the world
are in an eternal pattern of the total world-movements. If
correctly analysed, our undertakings are controlled,
regulated, governed and ordered by the available world-
of-things and situations. Apart from them all, no
independent action is undertaken, or can be fulfilled by
904
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
anyone. A devotee of Truth is ever conscious of this
oneness of the Universe, and therefore, he will always
work in the world only as AN INSTRUMENT OF THE
LORD and not as an independent agent in the
undertaking.
Such a devotee who possesses all the six qualifications
enumerated above "IS DEAR TO ME."
ADDING A FEW STROKES, KRISHNA PAINTS THE
PICTURE INTO A MORE REALISTIC VIVIDNESS:
17. He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires,
renouncing good and evil, full of devotion, is dear to Me.
A perfect devotee is one who has lifted himself from the
world of his mind-intellect and has awakened to his inner
Spiritual Nature. As such, the ordinary experiences of joy
and sorrow, of pain and pleasure, which generally give
the restlessness of life do not affect him.
HE WHO NEITHER REJOICES --- 'Rejoicing' is the feeling
of satisfaction and fulfilment that comes to us on attaining
a desired object, which is extremely desirable, and
extremely difficult to realise.
NOR HATES --- The sense of revulsion that comes to us
towards undesirable things and circumstances, when they
crowd around us, is generally the sense of HATRED. In
short, these two terms indicate that there are no objects
905
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
which he would ardently like to acquire, nor is there any
occasion to fret about on coming in contact with things or
situations that are undesirable from his standpoint.
NEITHER GRIEVES, NOR DESIRES --- Grief is generally
experienced while parting with a beloved object, and
desires are entertained when one yearns to have and to
possess something unattained at present. A Man-of-
Perfection is one whose beloved object, the Self, can never
be apart from him. And he has no sense of attachment
with any other object. Having attained the Self, the
inhabitant of his heart, he has such a complete sense of
fulfilment that he has no more any desire for attaining
anything that he has not attained. The Self being the All,
he has attained everything.
RENOUNCING GOOD AND EVIL --- The happenings in
the world around us can fall under these two categories,
according to whether they arouse in us a feeling of joy or
sorrow. To any person who is living away from the realm
of the dualistic experiences, and who has learnt the art of
drawing inspiration from something beyond, none of the
happenings, here at the level of the mind and the intellect,
can be of any serious consequences.
The above terms used in the stanza, for painting a perfect-
man, have a secret import. If we consider only the literal
meaning, we will think that such a perfect-man is a dead
corpse; "NEITHER REJOICES, NOR HATES; NOR
DESIRES; RENOUNCING GOOD AND EVIL" --- he lies
906
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dead! This is a very striking example of how the literal
meanings are not at all what is to be understood in
scriptural declarations.
Similarly, when a true devotee, being awakened to the
God-Consciousness, evaluates life from his new height of
experience, he cannot rejoice or hate, grieve for or desire
anything in this world and he comes to renounce totally
the very concepts of good and evil. The Divine Charioteer
(Krishna) declares: "HE WHO IS SUCH A DEVOTEE IS
DEAR TO ME."
The stanza represents the FOURTH SECTION in which
again the Lord has enumerated six more qualities that
make up a perfect devotee. So far we have been told of
twenty-six subtle traits which are the 'intrinsic qualities of
a Perfect Yogi.'
IN A LAST WAVE OF ENTHUSIASM KRISHNA
ENUMERATES:
18. He who is the same to foe and friend, and also in honour and
dishonour, who is the same in cold and heat and in pleasure and
pain, who is free from attachment . . .
19. To whom censure and praise are equal, who is silent, content
with anything, homeless, steady-minded, full of devotion --- that
man is dear to Me.
907
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
EQUAL TO FOE AND FRIEND --- The estimation of our
relationship with another as foe or friend is generally our
own psychological reaction towards another. It belongs
essentially to the heart. It is experienced by the
PSYCHOLOGICAL being in us. A Man-of-Perfection is one
who is not identifying himself with his mental estimation
of things, and therefore, he is equanimous and maintains a
uniformity of attitude towards his friends and foes.
AND SO TOO, IN HONOUR AND DISHONOUR --- A
situation is judged by the intellect as honourable or dis-
honourable with reference to its own existing values and
cultivated habits of thinking. That which is ordinarily
considered dishonourable can itself come to be estimated
by the same person as honourable in a new pattern of
circumstances ordered by a change in time and place. On
the whole, these are all different tides in the intellect; and
those who are living in that realm are affected by them.
WHO IS THE SAME IN HEAT AND COLD --- Heat and
cold are only the experiences of the body. By remembering
the preparation process of Nitric Acid, my 'thoughts'
cannot get corroded; by feeling the smouldering beauty of
the burning embers in the fire-place, my 'mind' cannot get
blisters. My knowledge or my capacity to love cannot
freeze at the North Pole; nor get evaporated in the Sahara
desert. Heat and cold affect only the body. And this idiom
in Sanskrit, whenever it is used in the context of
philosophy, represents all types of experiences to which
the physical equipment is the heir.
908
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The above three terms thus comprehend the entire
possibility of experiences in life: physical, mental, and
intellectual. In all of them, a true devotee is unagitated
because he "IS FREE FROM ATTACHMENT". Attachment
to and identification with the matter equipments --- body,
mind, intellect --- is the cause by which we are helplessly
made to dance to the mad tunes which the chance
happenings dictate. One who is detached from these
equipments is the one who is a master of them all.
TO WHOM CENSURE AND PRAISE ARE EQUAL --- Not
that he is immune to insults, nor is it because he is not
intelligent enough to understand them. To a great
devotee, living as he is in a realm of his own, full of
transcendental and blissful experiences of the Divine, the
worldly censure or even praise has no significance or
importance at all. He realises that one who has been
praised today will be censured by society tomorrow, and
that yesterday's censured man becomes the praiseworthy
leader of today!! Praise and censure are in themselves
nothing more than the passing fancy of those who express
them!
HE IS SILENT --- A true seeker of wisdom becomes a man
of few words --- not only physically but even mentally.
Silence within is real silence (Mouna). Keeping physical
silence but letting the mind loose to talk in itself, generally
results in a serious type of repression which ultimately
drives many to the porch of a mental hospital. Be silent
and understand how really silent silence can be!
909
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
CONTENT WITH ANYTHING --- Contented with
anything that might reach him accidentally, unasked and
unexpected, is the motto of all serious seekers of inward
growth. To entertain the demands in life and to strive
forth to satisfy them would be an unending game, as the
mind has a knack of breeding its own demands very fast.
The policy of contentment is the only intelligent attitude
to be taken up by all sincere seekers or else there will be
no time to seek, to strive for and to achieve the diviner
goal of life. Self-integration is a reward promised for
faithful pursuits and all-out attention. It is said in the
Mahabharata "he who is clad with anything, who is fed on
any FOOD, who lies down ANYWHERE, HIM THE
GODS CALL A BRAHMANA.
HOMELESS --- Home is generally that which provides
shelter from the external inclemencies of weather, for the
resident who is dwelling under its roof. The man of
spiritual realisation is one who is trying to pull down all
his conditionings and striving to free himself from all
sense of possession and material shackles.
Living under a roof, in itself, does not make the place a
home. To spend a night on a railway station, or in the
retiring room at an aerodrome, does not make the place
the traveller's own home. It is only along with a sense of
possession, reinforced with a sense of happiness and
comfort, that the place under a roof becomes a home. A
true devotee has for himself a satisfactory shelter only at
the feet of the All-Pervading, and therefore, his mental
910
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
condition is indicated here by the simple pertinent word
'homeless.'
Steadfast in his intellectual understanding of the goal, and
ever striving to attain his Divine ideal, that the Bhakta
dwells on --- "THAT MAN IS DEAR TO ME." There is
almost a suggestion, even though by implication, that one
who is at least striving to live these values is a full grown
man (Nara) to the Geeta Acharya.
These two verses represent the FIFTH SECTION which
enumerates ten more different qualities. In short, in thirty-
six artistic strokes, Lord Krishna has brought about a
complete picture of the Seeker-of-Perfection --- his
relationship with the world outside, his psychological life
and his intellectual evaluation of the world of beings and
happenings.
THE ENUMERATION OF THE VARIOUS MORAL,
ETHICAL AND SPIRITUAL QUALITIES OF A TRUE
DEVOTEE IS CONCLUDED WITH THESE:
20. They indeed, who follow this 'Immortal DHARMA' (Law of
Life) as described above, endowed with faith, regarding Me as
their Supreme Goal --- such devotees are exceedingly dear to
Me.
THIS IMMORTAL LAW PRESCRIBED ABOVE --- The
Sanatana Dharma is summarised in the above lines. To
911
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
realise the Self and live in that wisdom at all our
personality levels --- physical, mental and intellectual --- is
the fulfilment of the life of a Hindu. It is not sufficient that
a Hindu understands this, or reads regularly his
scriptures, or even explains them intelligently. He must be
able to digest them properly, assimilate them fully, and
become Perfect. Therefore, Bhagavan says that he must be
"ENDOWED WITH FAITH" here the term 'faith' means
"the necessary capacity to assimilate spiritual ideas into
ourselves through subjective personal experience."
SUCH DEVOTEES ARE SUPREMELY DEAR TO ME ---
This concluding stanza of the chapter constitutes the
SIXTH SECTION adding no definite trait to the list of
THIRTY-SIX QUALITIES already explained. But it forms a
commandment, a divine reassurance to all spiritual
seekers that when they accomplish these qualities in
themselves they will gain the Supreme Love of the Lord.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the twelfth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF DEVOTION
Though this chapter is styled as Bhakti Yoga, to read and
assimilate it is to cherish true love for the Lord and cure
ourselves of the various misconceptions that we have
today in our practice of Devotion. The 'Path-of-Devotion'
is not a mere sentimental explosion, or an excessive
912
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
emotional display. It is not a mere frivolous hysteria. It is
the blossoming of the human personality through the
surrender of our limitations and by acquiring new vitality
during the inspired moments of deep contemplation.
Om Om Om Om Om
913
