Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Dhyana Yoga
The Yoga of Meditation
The Blessed Lord said: 1. He who performs his bounden duty
without depending on the fruits-of-actions --- he is a
SAMNYASIN and a YOGIN ; not he who (has renounced) is
without fire and without action.
Arjuna's plan, in his own words in the first chapter, was to
escape from the battlefield in order to live the Samnyasa-
life. He did not know that a truly selfless worker is the
greatest Samnyasi, for, without renunciation, his action
would become, at best, only a mischievous meddling with
the harmony of the Universe.
To escape from the buzz of life in our present state of
unpreparedness into the quiet atmosphere of the banks of
the Ganges, is only the fall of an average good man to the
level of the insentient stone in the very Ganges. At the
close of this verse, Krishna laughs at Arjuna's sad
misconceptions. There is no bitterness in the irony of the
Lord. Soon we shall find that Arjuna also comes to laugh
at his own misunderstandings.
The whole chapter is so fully and entirely dedicated to
expounding the technique of cultivation, direction and
398
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
application of the inner forces of thoughts and feelings,
that it is very appropriate for Krishna to indicate the
greater importance of revolutionising our inner motives
and mental attitudes before we enter the path of
spirituality.
AS AN ELUCIDATING ANNOTATION FOR THE
QUIBBLE WHICH THE LORD HAD DECLARED IN THE
STANZA, WE HAVE HIS ADDED EXPLANATIONS IN
THE FOLLOWING, WHICH SHOW HOW SAMNYASA
ITSELF IS YOGA:
2. O Pandava, please know YOGA to be that which they call
renunciation; no one verily becomes a YOGI who has not
renounced thoughts.
Krishna is repeating the same idea, lest Arjuna should
overlook the fact that what they call Samnyasa, the
"renunciation of agency," is itself Yoga, the "renunciation
of the fruits-of-action." Samnyasa is the state reached
through Yoga, the practice; and the spiritual practice of
Yoga cannot even be thought of without the spirit of
Samnyasa in the bosom. The two are the obverse and the
reverse of the same coin of spiritual perfection!
It is but natural that the intellectually independent thinker
in Arjuna should, at this juncture, ask the question "Why?"
with raised brows, seeing which, the Charioteer implicitly
gives the logical reasons behind his seemingly outrageous
399
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and daring conclusion. The Lord explains that, never can
one become established in the practices for one's own
cultural-rehabilitation unless one has learnt the art of
renouncing all Sankalpas.
Man cannot ordinarily remain without imagining and
constantly creating, in his exuberant fancy. And in his
imagination he invariably tries to pull down the beautiful
veil thrown over the face of the future. Ripping open this
veil over the unknown, everyone of us, on all occasions, in
our imaginations, fix for ourselves a goal to be fulfilled by
us in the near future. Having fixed up the temporary goal,
our mind plans and creates a method of achieving that
hazy goal. But ere we execute our plans and enter into the
field of effort to carve out a success for ourselves, the
never-tiring, ever-active power of imagination in us
would already have wiped clean the goal fixed earlier,
and have rewritten a modified destination to be gained in
the future.
By the time we prepare ourselves mentally and start
executing our ideas in life, our mischievous fancy would
again have wiped the distant goal clean. Thus each time
the goal remains only so long as we have not started our
pilgrimage to it; and the moment we start the pilgrimage,
the goal fades away from our vision!
In short, when we have got a goal we have not yet started
acting, and the moment we start the strife, we seem to
have no goal to reach. The subtle force in our inner
400
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
composition which unconsciously creates this lunatic
temperament in us is called the unbridled Sankalpa Shakti.
We need no help from any great commentators to
understand that no achievement, either without or within
us, can be gained so long as we have not pursued,
arrested, and finally destroyed this dangerous inner
saboteur called 'Sankalpa.'
To show that there is no compromise in this, Bhagawan is
using a very positive term that none (kashchana) can ever
reach any progress on the path of self-redemption without
acquiring a capacity to renounce this self-poisoning
Sankalpa-disturbance.
KARMA YOGA, PRACTISED WITHOUT REGARD TO
THE FRUIT OF ACTION FORMS AN EXTERNAL AID
(BAHIRANGA SADHANA) TO DHYANA YOGA. THE
LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO SHOW HOW KARMA
YOGA IS A MEANS TO BETTER AND GREATER
MEDITATION.
3. For a MUNI or sage who "wishes to attain to YOGA, "
action is said to be the means; for the same sage who has
"attained to YOGA, " inaction (quiescence) is said to be the
means.
To one who is "DESIRING TO SCALE OVER THE
PRACTICE OF MENTAL CONCENTRATION AND
401
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SELF-IMPROVEMENT, WORK IS SAID TO BE THE
MEANS." By working in the world with neither the ego-
centric concept of agency nor the ego-centric desires for
the fruits of those actions, we are causing vasanas to play
out without creating any new precipitate of fresh
impressions.
The metaphor used here is borrowed from horse-riding,
and it is very powerful in its suggestions. When a wild
horse is being broken in, for some time, it will ride the
rider before the rider can ride it. If one desires to bring a
steed under perfect control, there is a period when, with
one leg on the stirrup, the individual has to hang on to the
saddle and with the other leg on the ground, must learn to
kick himself off from the ground and spring up and throw
his legs over the back of the animal, until he sits, with the
steed completely between his own legs. Having mounted,
it is easy to control the animal, but till then, the rider, in
his attempt to mount the horse, must pass through a stage
where he is neither totally on the horse nor on the ground.
In the beginning, we are merely workers in the world;
desire-prompted and ego-driven, we sweat and toil, weep
and sob. When an individual gets tired of such activities,
he comes to desire to mount the steed of the mind. Such
an individual, desiring to bring the mind under his control
and rise over it (Arurukshah) takes upon himself the same
work as before, but without the ego and ego-centric
desires. Such desireless activities undertaken in the Yajna-
SPIRIT explained earlier, (IV-18, 19 20, 21, and 25 to 30.)
402
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
cleanse the mind of its past impressions and integrate the
entire inner equipment. When thus the required amount
of concentration has been gained by the individual as a
result of the vasana-purgation effected, he is to stop his
activities slowly and apply himself more and more to live
in deeper meditation. When once his mind has been
conquered, and his agitations have become well-
controlled, the seeker in that state of mental growth and
development, is termed as "having mounted the steed of
the mind" (Yoga-Arudhah). To such an individual, in that
state of mental equipoise and self-application,
"quiescence" (Shama) is the means for gaining higher
perfection and self-growth.
By thus prescribing two methods at the two distinct stages
of the individual's growth, it is meant that they are not
contradictory. Selfless activity is good at a stage but
afterwards it becomes a positive agitation which brings
the mind down from its serener flights, and frequently
bumps it on the ground with a shattering shock. Specially
prepared milk powder, diluted with hot water, is the full
diet for an infant. But the same feeding-bottle will not
satisfy the growing demands of a boy vigorously working
and mischievously knocking about all day. The more solid
bread and butter are his diet. We need not be great
intellectuals to understand that buttered toast will choke
and kill an infant.
Similarly here, work without self is healthy for the
beginner, but a developed seeker needs more and more
403
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
quietude and self-withdrawal for growing in the steady
contemplation of life within. Earlier, 'work-without-self' is
the means, afterwards 'work-on-self' is the means; and the
process is continued until, working or not working,
through meditation, it is realised that the Self alone is the
essence in the ego which, till then, was recognised as the
only reality.
In this sense of the term, we clearly know how ritualism
has a definite place in the scheme of things as mapped out
by the Vedantin Seers of unimpeachable intellectual
eminence.
WHEN IS A MAN SAID TO BE A YOGARUDHAH --- TO
HAVE ATTAINED TO YOGA?... THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
4. When a man is not attached to sense-objects or to actions,
having renounced all thoughts, then he is said to have attained
to YOGA.
It is the experience of everyone, and therefore, it is not
very difficult for a young seeker to know the state of an
aspirant (Arurukshah). It has been said by the Lord that so
long as we are in the state of seeking, the Path of Self-
Perfection is the highroad of selfless activity. Withdrawal
from activity is to be undertaken only when you have
reached the state of mental mastery (Yogarudhah). To
renounce activity at an earlier stage, would be as
404
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
unhealthy as to continue disturbing the mind with
activities after having reached the second stage, where, we
are told, quiescence is the means for gathering speed in
our flight through meditation. Naturally, it is necessary
for the seeker to know when exactly he reaches the second
stage, indicated here by the term Yogarudhah.
In this stanza, Krishna is pointing out the physical and
mental conditions of one who has broken in the steed of
his mind and ridden it. He says that when one is feeling
no mental attachments, either to the sense-objects or to the
actions in the outer world, it is one of the symptoms of
perfect mastery over the mind. This should not be over-
stressed to a dreary literal meaning, making it a grotesque
caricature of Truth. It only means that the mind of a seeker
in the meditation seat is so perfectly withdrawn from the
external world of sense-objects and activities, that it is
perfect in its equipoise at the time of self-application. The
sense-organs can run into the channels of sense-objects
only when the mind is flowing out of the organs. If the
mind is kept engaged in the contemplation of a great
Truth, providing a larger quota of an ampler joy in the
inner bosom, it will no more go hunting for bits of joy in
the gutters of sensuality. A well-fed pet dog will not seek
the public dust-bins for its food.
When thus the mind is not gushing out either through the
sense-channels or through the fields of its ego-centric
activities, it becomes completely engaged in the
contemplation of the greater truth --- the Self. Here the
405
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
term used to indicate complete non-attachment, is to be
noted very carefully. The Sanskrit word anu-shaijate is a
word-symbol created by prefixing an indeclinable anu to
the verb shaj, meaning 'attached.' The prefix anu indicates
'not a bit'. Therefore, the term used here forbids even
traces of attachment either to the sense-objects or to the
fields of activity.
When the mind has been withdrawn from the sense-
organs and completely detached from all its external
physical activities, it is possible that it is still tossed and
agitated by the gurglings of its own inner instincts of
willing and wishing, desiring and earning. This power of
Sankalpa can bring more storms into the bosom of a man
than the disturbances his mind could ever receive from
the external world. Krishna indicates here that he who has
gained a complete mastery over his mind is one who has
not only withdrawn himself from all sense-contacts and
activities in the outer world, but has also dried up all the
Sankalpa-disturbances in his own mind. Such an
individual is, at the moment of meditation, in that inward
state which is described here as Yogarudhah. It is clear that,
to such an individual, meditation can be intensified only
by quietude (Shama).
WHEN A MAN HAS ATTAINED YOGA, THEN THE
SELF IS RAISED BY THE SELF, FROM OUT OF THE
NUMEROUS EVILS OF FINITE EXISTENCE
THEREFORE:
406
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
5. Let a man lift himself by his own Self alone, and let him not
lower himself; for, this Self alone is the friend of oneself, and this
Self is the enemy of oneself.
As a complete Shastra, the Geeta has to be faithful to Truth
and Truth alone, irrespective of what the tradition of the
country, at a given period, might have made the faithful
ones believe. It is not very unhealthy to believe that Grace
from an external source is constantly helping a true seeker
striving on his path --- but this is really healthy only when
this thought is correspondingly complemented with
sufficiently intense self-effort. "MAN SHOULD UPLIFT
HIMSELF BY HIMSELF," is an open statement declared
by no less a person than Lord Krishna Himself --- not
cooed in a playful mood in the company of the gopis on
the Jamuna-banks at a hilarious hour of laughter and play,
but roared to Arjuna on the battlefield at a serious
moment of His life's fulfilment as an Avatara. Man, if he
wants to exalt himself into the greater cultural and
spiritual possibilities now lying dormant in him, has to
raise the lower in himself to the greater perfection that is
the true and eternal core in himself.
Everyone has in himself a picture of the ideal. This
intellectual conception of ourselves is always very vivid in
each one of us. But unfortunately, this ideal remains only
in the realm of thought and is not lived in the world of
activity. Intellectually we may have a clear and vivid
picture of what we should be, but mentally and physically
407
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
we behave as though we were the opposites of our own
ideal concepts. The gulf between the 'IDEAL-ME' and the
'ACTUAL-ME' is the measure of man's fall from his
perfection.
Most of us are generally unconscious of this duality in
ourselves. We mistakes ourselves to be the ideal and are
generally blind to our own ACTUAL imperfections. Thus
we find a notoriously selfish man in society warmly and
sincerely criticising the slightest traces of selfishness in his
neighbour! In a world of no mirrors, it is possible that a
squint-eyed man may laugh at another squint-eyed person
because the one who laughs knows not the angle in which
his own eye-balls are facing each other!!
Within ourselves, if we, carefully watch, we can discover
that intellectually we have a clear concept of a morally
strong, ethically perfect, physically loving and socially
disciplined man that 'we should be'; but in the mental
zones of our emotions and feelings, however, we are
tantalised by our own attachments, likes and dislikes,
loves and hatreds, appetites and passions, and we behave
like curs fed by the way-side gutters and ever quarrelling
with others of the same ilk over dry and marrowless
bones!!
As long as the individual has not realised the existence of
this dual personality in himself, there cannot be any
religion for him. If an individual has discovered that there
is "enough in him to be divided into two portions," and
408
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
when he wants to keep the lower as brilliant and chaste as
the higher, the technique that he will have to employ to
fulfil this aspiration is called RELIGION.
Mind is the saboteur that enchants us away from
perfection, to be a slave to the flesh and the external
objects of brittle satisfaction. Mind is the conditioning that
distorts the ideal and creates the lower Satanic sensuous
self in us, which is to be brought into unison with the
intellect, the equipment for the higher Self to manifest. In
short, when the rational and discriminative capacities of a
limited intellect are brought to bear their authority upon
the wavering and wandering, sense-mongering-mind, the
lower is brought under discipline and made to attune with
the nobler and the diviner in us. The processes by which
the lower is brought under the direct management and
discipline of the higher are all together called the spiritual
techniques.
This process of self-rehabilitation and self-redemption of
the Satan in us cannot be executed by inviting tenders and
giving the contract to the lowest bidder! Each will have to
do it all by himself: "ALONE TO THE ALONE ALL
ALONE" IS THE WAY. No Guru can take the
responsibility; no scripture can promise this redemption;
no altar can, with its divine blessings, make the lower the
higher. The lower must necessarily be trained slowly and
steadily to accept and come under the influence of the
discipline of the higher. In this process, the teacher, the
scripture, and the houses-of-God, have all their proper
409
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
appointed duties and limited influences. But the actual
happening depends upon how far we ourselves learn to
haul ourselves out from the gutters of misunderstanding
in ourselves.
So far Bhagawan has indicated an exhaustive treatment
which may be, in many of its aspects, considered as
equivalent to the modern psychological process called
introspection. Realising our own weaknesses, rejecting the
false, asserting the better, and trying to live, generally, as
best as we can, the higher way-of-life, is the process of
introspection. But his is only half the entire process and
not the whole of it.
The other half also is insisted upon, here, by Krishna. It is
not only sufficient that we look within, come to note our
weaknesses, erase them, substitute the opposite good
qualities, and develop in ourselves the better, but we must
see to it, that, whatever little conquests we might have
made out of Satan's province are not again handed back to
Satan's dominion. Krishna warns, almost in the same
breath, "DO NOT ALLOW THE SELF THEREAFTER TO
FALL DOWN AND BE DRAGGED AGAIN" to the old
level of the cheaper way of existence.
The second line of the stanza contains a glorious idea
shaped into a beauty of expression which almost
immortalises Vyasa. We are considered both as our own
friend and our own enemy. Any intelligent man observing
and analysing life will vouchsafe for the truth of the
410
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
statement, but here, more is meant philosophically, than
meets the eye. Generally, we do not fully understand the
import when we say "THE SELF IS THE FRIEND OF THE
SELF."
The lower in us can ever raise itself to the attunement of
the Higher, but the Higher can influence only when the
lower is available for Its influence. To the extent the lesser
in us surrenders itself to the influence of the Higher, to
that extent, It can serve the lower as a great friend. But if
the lower refuses to come under the influence of the
Diviner in us, the Divine Presence is accused as an enemy
of ourselves, inasmuch as the dynamism of life provides
us Its energy both for our "life of higher aspirations" and
the "life of low temptations."
Ultimately, it is for the aspirant himself to accept the
responsibility for blessing or damning himself. The
potentiality for improvement, the chances for self-growth,
the strength to haul ourselves out from our own
misconceptions, are ever open for employment. But it all
depends upon how we make use of them.
NOW IT MAY BE ASKED: "WHAT SORT OF A MAN IS
THE FRIEND OF HIMSELF AND WHAT SORT OF A
MAN IS THE ENEMY OF HIMSELF?" THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
411
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
6. The Self is the friend of the self for him who has conquered
himself by the Self, but to the unconquered self, the Self stands
in the position of an enemy like the (external) foe.
The Divine in us becomes a friend when, under its
influence, the Satan in us gets converted. To the extent the
lower ego withdraws itself from its identifications with
the body and the sense-organs, feelings and ideas relating
to the extrovert life, to that extent that given ego has come
under the salutory influence of the nobler and the Diviner.
To such an ego, available for corrective proselytisation, the
Self is a friend. But where the little self remains a constant
rebel against the Higher, to that unconquered-self, the
Diviner Self is as if inimical in Its attitude.
In short, the higher Self becomes a friend to the lower
which is available for and which allows itself to be
conquered by the higher influence; and the Diviner
becomes inimical to the undivine when the lower limited
ego remains unconquered by the higher aspirations in us.
This stanza is an elucidating annotation on the previous
one.
EARLIER, THE STATE OF MENTAL EQUIPOISE,
CALLED YOGARUDHAH, WAS EXPLAINED. WHAT
EXACTLY IS THE FULFILMENT OF SUCH A STATE IN
YOGA IS BEING EXPLAINED NOW:
412
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
7. The Supreme Self of him who is self-controlled and peaceful,
is balanced in cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as also in
honour and dishonour.
When a seeker has come in his inner life to the state
explained as Yogarudhah, and when in that State of
equipoise, the mind is held steadfast in contemplation
over the Supreme, the self-controlled one, in all serenity, is
capable of maintaining his consistency of meditation in all
circumstances, favourable and adverse, at all levels of his
personality. In the second line of the stanza it is clearly
indicated that no excuse in the world is sufficiently strong
to justify a seeker's inability to continue keeping the
awareness of his Eternal Nature in himself.
Three pairs-of-opposites are indicated here as: (i) heat and
cold; (ii) joy and sorrow; (iii) honour and dishonour. In
enumerations of these three pairs of conditions, Krishna is
exhausting, through the mention of the types, all possible
threats to his equipoise and tranquillity that an individual
may get from the outer world.
HEAT AND COLD --- These are stimuli that are felt and
experienced by the body, at the body level. Whether in
heat or in cold, thoughts, we know, do not expand or
shrink, and the ideas cannot shiver or perspire. All these
reactions can be only in the body, and therefore, Krishna
is indicating by this pair all the vicissitudes that may visit
the body, such as health and disease, youth and old-age,
etc.
413
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
By the second pair-of-opposites indicated here as
PLEASURE AND PAIN, the Lord is symbolically
indicating all the destinies suffered in the mental zone.
Pleasure and pain are experienced not by the body but
always by the mind. It includes all the tyrannies of our
different emotions which might threaten the mental arena,
at one time or another in a man's life. Hatred and love,
affection and jealousy, kindness and cruelty... a thousand
varieties of emotions may storm the 'within'; but none of
them is an excuse, according to Krishna, for the diligent
and the sincere to lose hold of himself from the
steadfastness in his contemplation.
Similarly also, the last pair-of-opposites indicated as
HONOUR AND DISHONOUR shows how no threat of
any storm in the intellectual zone is a sufficient plea to
sympathise with an individual who has fallen away from
the State of Perfection. Honour and dishonour are
evaluated and reacted to only by the intellect.
Thus, by these three representative pairs-of-opposites
from the three worlds of the body, the mind, and the
intellect, Krishna is trying to exhaust all possibilities of
obstacles in man's life, and then he adds that in all such
conditions, the Supreme Self is to be the object of constant
realisation for one who is perfectly self-controlled and
serene. He ever remains unruffled in all circumstances ---
favourable or unfavourable; in all environments --- good
or bad; in all companies --- wise or foolish.
414
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT IS THE GLORY OF SUCH AN INDIVIDUAL?
WHAT DOES HE BECOME BY SUCH A PROCESS? WHY
SHOULD HE GO THROUGH SUCH A LABORIOUS
INWARD TRAINING AND SELF-DISCIPLINE?
8. The YOGI who is satisfied with knowledge and wisdom, who
remains unshaken, who has conquered the senses, to whom a
lump of earth, a stone and gold are the same, is said to be
harmonised (i. e. , is said to have attained NIRVIKALPA
SAMADHI) .
Such an individual, self-controlled and serene, who has
constantly come to contemplate upon the Nature of the
Self as understood from the Shastras, through all his
circumstances in life, soon becomes, says Krishna, filled
with a divine satisfaction and becomes an unshakable
Yogin. Here, the satisfaction is not merely the joy that an
intelligent man comes to enjoy when he carefully studies
and masters Vedanta, but, according to Krishna, the
satisfied contentment which a true Yogin comes to
experience and which is much superior to the thrilled joys
experienced in all intense studies.
The knowledge gained through study is indicated here by
the term Jnana, and the first-hand experience gained by
the seeker of the Self in himself is called the Knowledge of
direct perception, which is termed here, in the Geeta-
vocabulary, as Vijnana.
415
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
UNCHANGING, IMMUTABLE (Kootasthah) --- This is the
term used for the Eternal Self. Its expressiveness becomes
apparent when we understand that the term "koota" in
Sanskrit, means the "anvil." The anvil is that upon which
the blacksmith places his red-hot-iron-bits and hammers
them into the required shapes. In spite of the hammerings,
nothing happens to the anvil as the anvil resists all
modifications and change, but allows all other things to
get changed upon it. Thus, the term "kootasthah" means
that which "remains anvil-like" and though itself suffers
no change, it makes others change.
He is a saint and has the full-blown fragrance of
perfection, who has sought and discovered a perfect
contentment which arises out of this subjective experience
of what the Shastra says, and has come in contact with the
Self that changes not. And such a saint becomes tranquil
and a master of equal-vision in all conditions of life. To
him, a clod of mud, a precious stone and costly gold are
all the same. This equanimity of mind in profit and loss, at
the acquisition of precious things or at the presentation of
mere filth, is the very test to show that the individual has
spiritually evolved and that to him no gain can bring any
extra joy, nor any loss --- any sorrow!!
In my dream I earned a lot of wealth, but ere I enjoyed it
fully, I woke up to my waking-state, poverty. In my
destitution, when I am suffering the pangs of hunger, I
will not feel, in any sense of the term, consoled by the
thought that I was rich in my dream and that in my
416
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dream-bank I had my dream-riches in its dream-vaults!
Similarly, to a master who has gained perfection and
transcended the world of the mind and intellect, and
achieved the true awakening of the Soul, thereafter, a
lump of earth, a piece of gold or a precious stone of this
world are all equally futile things. They cannot add even a
jot of extra joy or pain unto him. He has become the sole
proprietor of Bliss Absolute. To Kubera, the treasurer of the
heavens, a kingdom on the globe is no profit and has no
power to make him dance in ecstasy!!
MOREOVER:
9. He who is of the same mind to the good-hearted, friends,
enemies, the indifferent, the neutral, the hateful, relatives, the
righteous and the unrighteous, he excels.
In the previous stanza it was indicated that the man of
perfection develops equal-vision as far as things of the
world are concerned. The universe is not made of things
alone, but is constituted of beings also. Now the doubt
arises, what will be the relationship of a perfect man of
equipoise with the living kingdom of beings around him?
Will he negate the whole lot as unreal? In his
preoccupations with the experience of the Eternal and the
Immortal, which is the substratum for the entire world of
changing phenomenal beings, will he ignore to serve the
world and help the living generation? This idea is taken
up here for discussion.
417
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Such a man of excellence, says Krishna, regards all
relationships with an equal love and consideration, be
they "FRIENDS, OR FOES, OR INDIFFERENT OR
NEUTRAL, OR HATEFUL, OR NEAREST RELATIONS."
In his equal-vision, all of them are equally important and
he embraces, in his Infinitude, all of them with the same
warmth and ardour.
His love knows no distinction between the righteous and
the unrighteous, the good and the bad. To him a sinner is
but an ego living in its misunderstandings, since sin is
only a mistake of the soul and not a positive blasphemy
against Itself. Rama Tirtha beautifully expresses it when
he says that "we are punished BY the sin and not FOR it."
In the right understanding of his own Self and the
resulting realisation of his own Self, he becomes the Self
everywhere. He discovers a unity in the perceived
diversity and a subtle rhythm in the obvious discord in
the world outside. To him, who has realised himself to be
the Self which is all-pervading, the entire universe
becomes his own Self, and therefore, his relationship with
every other part of the universe is equal and same.
Whether I get wounded in the hand or the leg, on the back
or in the front, on the head or on the shoulder, it is the
same to me, since I am equally identifying with my head,
my trunk, and my legs, as myself.
418
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THROUGH WHAT METHODS CAN ONE ATTAIN THIS
HIGHEST GOAL AND ASSURE FOR HIMSELF THE
SUREST RESULT? IT IS EXPLAINED:
10. Let the YOGI try constantly to keep the mind steady,
remaining in solitude, alone, with the mind and body controlled,
free from hope and greed.
In the Mahabharata, Krishna is conceived as a voluntary
manifestation of the Supreme and hence He is addressed
as Shri Krishna Paramatman. He is giving here an advice to
His most intimate friend and life's companion, Arjuna, on
the methods of self-development and the techniques of
self-perfection. Even then, it is not said that the Lord will
give him a secret method by which he will not have to
make any struggle at all and that the entire responsibility
will be borne by the Creator of the Universe. The very
opening words of the stanza weed out any such false
hopes in the minds of the seekers. "O MAN OF SELF-
CONTROL (YOGI), YOU SHOULD CONSTANTLY
PRACTISE CONCENTRATION." It is only through the
practice of meditation that a mortal can grow out of his
weaknesses and flower forth culturally into the greater
perfection-possibilities within himself.
Details of how the meditation is to be conducted are given
in the rest of the stanza. "SITTING IN SOLITUDE," one
should practise meditation. This word has been,
unnecessarily, so overstretched in recent times in India
419
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that the term "meditation" brings a sense of horror and
fear into the minds of the early seekers. It does not mean
that meditation can be practised only in the jungles and in
the solitude of caves. It only means that the seeker should
try to withdraw himself from his mental and physical
preoccupations and should retire to a corner in his house,
for the purpose of early meditation.
Solitude can be gained only when there is a mental
withdrawal from the world outside. One who is full of
desires and constantly meditating upon the sense-objects,
cannot hope to gain any solitude even in a virgin forest.
Again, the word solitude (Rahasi) suggests a meaning of
secretiveness, indicating that religion should not be a
broadcast of self-advertisement, but must be a set of true
values of life, secretly practised within the heart, ordering
our way of thinking and encouraging our pursuit of the
nobler values in life.
PHYSICALLY ALONE (Ekaki) --- For the purpose of
meditation, when one strives, his success in inward
quietude will be directly proportional to the amount of
self-control he is practising in his daily life. Self-control is
not possible unless we know how to free ourselves from
the "eagerness to possess" and the "anxiety to hoard." To
renounce our preoccupations with our endless plans for
possessing more is indicated here by the term "free from
hope" (Nirashih). And the term "free from possessions"
(Aparigraha) indicates all our anxieties in saving, hoarding
and protecting what we possess.
420
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
When one, well-established in these necessary physical
self-controls and essential mental and intellectual habits,
sits meditating upon the Truth in all secrecy, he is a true
seeker striving on the right path to achieve and acquire
the highest that is possible in life.
NOW, IN THE SEQUEL, THE LORD PROCEEDS TO
PRESCRIBE FOR THE YOGA-PRACTITIONER
PARTICULAR MODES OF SITTING, EATING,
RECREATION AND THE LIKE, THAT ARE AIDS TO
YOGA. FIRST OF ALL, HE EXPLAINS THE MODE OF
SITTING AS FOLLOWS:
11. Having, in a clean spot, established a firm seat of his own,
neither too high nor too low, made of a cloth, a skin and
KUSHA -grass, one over the other, . . .
If meditation is the path by which one can gain
tranquillity and equal-vision within oneself, it is necessary
that, in this text-book on self-perfection, Lord Krishna
should give a complete and exhaustive explanation of the
technique of meditation. In order to fulfil this demand,
hereunder we get a few verses explaining the position, the
means and the ends of a meditator at his work.
In these words is a description of the seat and the place for
perfect meditation.
421
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
"IN A CLEAN PLACE" --- This is important inasmuch as
the external conditions have a direct bearing upon the
human mind. In a clean place there is more chance for the
seeker to maintain a cleaner mental condition. Apart from
this, commentators explain that the place should be rid of
mosquitoes, house-flies, bugs, ants and such other
creatures that may disturb the beginner's mental
concentration which he is trying to turn inward.
In his seat, the meditator is asked to sit steady (Sthiram).
Without moving the physical body at short intervals and
without swinging the body either forward and backward
or sideways, the seeker is asked to get firmly established
on his seat, because physical movement immensely
contributes to the shattering of mental concentration and
inner equipoise. This is very well realised by all of us, if
we only remember our attitude when we are sincerely and
seriously thinking over something. In order to get
established in a firm posture it would be advisable to sit in
any "comfortable seat" (Asana), with the vertebral column
erect, fingers interlocked and hands thrown in front.
Adding more details, Krishna says that the seat of
meditation "should not be too high or too low." If it is too
high there will be a sense of insecurity in the meditator,
created as a result of instinct of self-preservation, and he
will find it difficult to extricate himself from his outer-
world-consciousness and plunge himself into the inner.
Again, we are told that the seat should not be too low; this
is to avoid the mistake of meditating in any damp under-
422
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ground cellar, where perchance, the seeker may develop
rheumatic pains in his body. During meditation the heart-
action becomes slightly low, and, to the extent we are
withdrawn into ourselves, even the blood pressure falls.
At such a time of low resistance, if the place be damp,
there is a great chance of a seeker developing pains in his
joints. To avoid such troubles, the warning is given here.
When the Geeta is out to give details, she leaves nothing
to the imagination of the student. The exhaustive details
regarding the ideal seat for meditation is an example. It is
said here that a mattress of Kusha-grass on the ground,
with a deer-skin covered with a piece of cloth on top of it,
is the perfect seat for long meditations. Dampness is
avoided
by the Kusha-grass which keeps the seat warm during
winter. In summer the skin becomes too hot and some
seekers are allergic to the animal skin, especially when
their skin has become slightly moist with perspiration.
This contingency is being avoided by spreading over the
skin a piece of clean cloth. Having thus established
himself firmly on the meditation seat, prepared as above,
what exactly he is to do mentally and intellectually, is now
explained.
WHAT SHOULD BE DONE AFTER ESTABLISHING
ONESELF UPON THE PREPARED SEAT?
423
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
12. There, having made the mind one-pointed, with the actions
of the mind and the senses controlled, let him, seated on the seat,
practise YOGA, for the purification of the self.
However scientifically prepared it might be, to sit in an
appropriate Asana (seat) is not, in itself, Yoga. The
appropriate physical condition is conducive to generating
the right mental attitude for the spiritual practices, but a
mere physical posture cannot in itself, guarantee any
spiritual self-development.
In this verse, Krishna is giving what the seeker should
practise in his seat of meditation. Having made the body
steadfast in posture, how one should employ his mind
and intellect in the process of divine contemplation and
meditation is the theme being discussed here. The first
instruction given is that "YOU SHOULD MAKE THE
MIND SINGLE-POINTED." This instruction cannot be
worked out by a seeker unless he knows how he can bring
about this necessary inward condition in himself. It is very
cheap and easy for a Rishi to advise the members of the
confused generation to make their minds integrated.
Such an advice, when not sufficiently supported by
practical details, becomes a mere high-sounding
philosophy and not a useful guidance for the seekers. The
Geeta, being a text-book which translates philosophy into
life in its typical spirit, here the stanza immediately
explains how we can bring the mind to an ideal single-
pointedness.
424
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SUBDUING THE FACULTY OF IMAGINATION AND
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SENSE-ORGANS --- This is the
instruction given by Krishna. Single-pointedness is the
very potent nature of the mind but the mind gets stunned
by its own silence, confused and even mad when it gets
dynamised by either the inner forces of its own surging
imaginations or the outward pull exerted by the
hallucinations of the sense-organs. If these two venues of
dissipation are blocked, instantaneously the mind
becomes, by its own nature, single-pointed.
Thus, seated on the prepared meditation-seat, and making
the mind single-pointed through the process of subduing
mental imaginations and controlling the wild activities of
the sense-organs, the seeker is encouraged to practise
Yoga. To keep the single-pointed mind constantly at the
steady contemplation of the Ultimate Self is the inner Yoga
that has been mentioned here.
Naturally, every seeker would desire to know why he
should meditate thus. In order to remove all mis-
understandings of the meditators that they would thereby
directly come face to face with the Atman, Krishna here
appends to the verse the effects of such meditation.
Through steady and regular meditation, the Shastra
promises inner purification only. Agitations in the mind
are its impurities. A purified mind is that which has no
agitations and when the mind has thus become pure and
steady, the Consciousness, looking at the steady reflection
of Itself, comes to rediscover Its own Real Nature. This
425
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
process is similar to the techniques by which we
understand ourselves while consulting our own
reflections in a mirror.
THE EXTERNAL SEAT HAS BEEN DESCRIBED. NOW,
WHAT SHOULD BE THE POSTURE OF THE BODY?
LISTEN:
13. Let him firmly hold his body, head and neck erect and still,
gazing at the tip of his nose, without looking around.
After describing in detail the arrangement of the seat of
meditation and how to sit there properly, Lord Krishna
had thereafter explained what the meditator should do
with his mind and intellect. He has also said that the mind
should be made single-pointed by subduing all the
activities of the sense-organs and the imagination. Adding
more details to the technique of meditation, it is now said
that the meditator should firmly hold his body in such a
fashion that his vertebral column is completely erect. The
head and the neck should be erect in this posture, which is
geometrically perpendicular to the horizontal seat upon
which the Yogi is firmly settling himself; it is pointedly
indicated that he should hold his body "firmly."
This term should not be misunderstood as holding the
body in tension. "Firmly" here means that the body should
not be held stiffly but relaxed, it must be held in such a
426
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
manner that there should not be any tendency to swing
forward and backward or sideways from right to left.
The seeker, having thus made himself ready for
meditation, should "GAZE AT THE TIP OF THE NOSE."
This does not mean that an individual should, with half-
opened eyes, deliberately turn his eye-balls towards the
"tip of his own nose." There are many seekers who have
come to suffer physical discomforts, such as headaches,
giddiness, exhaustion, tensions, etc., because they have
tried to follow this instruction too literally. Shankara, in
his commentary, has definitely given us the right
direction. He says that the term here means only that the
meditator, while meditating, should have his attention
"AS THOUGH TURNED TOWARDS THE TIP OF HIS
OWN NOSE." That this interpretation is not a laboured
and artificial intellectualism of the Acharya is clearly borne
out by the next phrase in the second line.
NOT LOOKING AROUND --- This instruction clearly
shows what was in the mind of Krishna when he gave the
instruction that the meditator should direct his entire
attention towards the tip of his own nose --- so that his
concentration may not be dissipated and his mind may
not wander all around. Where the eyes go, there the mind
faithfully follows; this is the law. That is why, when an
individual is confused, we find that his gaze is not steady.
Many a time we judge another individual as behaving
funny or suspicious, and in all such cases our evidence is
nothing other than the unsteadiness in his gaze. Watch
427
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
anyone who is indecisive and who is unsteady in his
determination and you can immediately observe that the
individual's look is definitely unsteady and confusedly
wandering.
MOREOVER:
14. Serene-minded, fearless, firm in the vow of
BRAHMACHARYA, having controlled the mind, thinking on
Me and balanced, let him sit, having Me as the Supreme Goal.
When the meditator has thus practised meditation for a
certain period of time, as a result of his practice, he comes
to experience a larger share of quietude and peace in his
mind. This extremely subtle form of inward peace is
indicated here by the term "Prashanta." This inward
silence, a revelling in an atmosphere of extreme joy and
contentment --- is the exact situation in which the
individual can be trained to express the nobler and the
diviner qualities which are inherent in the Divine Self.
A meditator invariably finds it difficult to scale into the
higher realms of experience due to sheer psychological
fear-complex. As the Yogin slowly and steadily gets
unwound from his sensuous vasanas, he gets released, as it
were, from the cruel embrace of his own mental octopus.
At this moment of transcendence, the unprepared seeker
feels mortally afraid of the thought that he is getting
himself dissolved into "NOTHINGNESS." The ego,
428
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
because of its long habit of living in close proximity to its
own limitations, finds it hard even to believe that there is
an Existence Supreme, Divine and Infinite. One is
reminded of the story of the stranded fisher-women who
complained that they could not get any sleep at all when
they had to spend the night in a flower-shop, till they put
their baskets very near their noses. Away from our pains,
we dread to enter the Infinite Bliss!
This sense of fear is the death-knell of all spiritual
progress. Even if progress were to reach the bosom of
such an individual, he would be compelled to reject it,
because of the rising storm of his subjective fear.
Even though the mind has become extremely peaceful and
joyous, and has renounced all its sense of fear through the
study of the Scriptures and continuous practice of regular
meditation, the progress is not assured because the
possibility of failure shall ever hang over the head of the
seeker, unless he struggles hard to get established in
perfect Brahmacharya.
THE ASCETICISM OF BRAHMACHARYA --- Here the
phrase implies not only its Upanishadic implications, but
definitely something more original, especially when it
comes from Lord Krishna's mouth and that too, in the
context of
the Geeta. Brahmacharya, generally translated as 'celibacy,'
has a particular meaning, but the term has also a wider
429
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and a more general implication. Brahmacharya is not
ONLY the control of the sex-impulses but is also the
practice of self-control in all avenues of sense-impulses
and sense-satisfactions. Unless the seeker has built up a
perfect cage of intelligent self-control, the entire world-of-
objects will flood his bosom, to bring therein a state of
unending chaos. A mind thus agitated by the inflow of
sense stimuli, is a mind that is completely dissipated and
ruined.
Apart from this meaning, which is essentially indicative of
the goal, or rather, a state of complete detachment from
the mind's courtings of the external world-of-objects, there
is a deeper implication to this significant and famous
term. Brahmacharya, as such, is a term that can be
dissolved in Sanskrit to mean "wandering in Brahma-
Vichara." To engage our mind in the contemplation of the
Self, the Supreme Reality, is the saving factor that can
really help us in withdrawing the mind from external
objects.
The human mind must have one field or another to
engage itself in. Unless it is given some inner field to
meditate upon, it will not be in a position to retire from its
extrovert pre-occupations. This is the secret behind all
success in "total celibacy." The successful Yogin need not
be gazed at as a rare phenomenon in nature, for his
success can be the success of all, only if they know how to
establish themselves in this inward self-control. It is
because people are ignorant of the positive methods to be
430
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
practised for a continuous and successful negation and
complete rejection of the charms of the sense-organs, that
they invariably fail in their endeavour.
Naturally, it becomes easy for the individual who has
gained in himself all the three above-mentioned qualities
to control and direct the new-found energies in himself.
The inward peace, an attribute of the intellect, comes only
when the discriminative faculty is relatively quiet.
Fearlessness brings about a great control over the
exhausting thought commotions in the mental zone.
Brahmacharya, in its aspect of sense-withdrawal, lends a
larger share of physical quietude. Therefore, when, by the
above process, the intellect, mind and body are all
controlled and brought to the maximum amount of peace
and quietude, the 'way of life' pursued by the seeker
provides for him a large saving of mental energy which
would otherwise have been spent away in sheer
dissipation.
This newly-discovered and fully availed-of strength
makes the mind stronger and stronger, so that the seeker
experiences in himself a growing capacity to withdraw his
wandering mind unto himself and to fix his entire
thoughts "in the contemplation of Me, the Self."
The concluding instruction in this most significant verse in
the chapter is: "LET HIM SIT IN YOGA HAVING ME AS
HIS SUPREME GOAL." It has been already said in an
earlier chapter that the meditator should continue
431
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
meditation, and ere long (achirena), he will have the
fulfilment of his meditation. The same idea is suggested
here. Having made the mind tame, and keeping it away
from its own endless dissipations, we are instructed to
keep the single-pointed mind in contemplation of the
Divine Self and His Eternal Nature. Immediately
following this instruction is the order that we should
remain in this attitude of meditation, seeking nothing else
but "ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL." Ere long, in
the silence and quietude within, the withering mind and
other equipments will exhaust themselves, and the seeker
will wake up to realise his own Infinite, Eternal, Blissful
and quiet Nature, the Self.
15. Thus, always keeping the mind balanced, the YOGI, with
his mind controlled, attains to the Peace abiding in Me, which
culminates in total liberation (NIRVANA or MOKSHA) .
After thus describing the physical pose, the mental
stability and the consequent intellectual self-application,
the Lord now describes the last lap in the technique of
meditation to His beloved friend, the Pandava Prince.
When all the above details are worked out by anyone, that
individual becomes a man steadfast both in his physical
and in his subtler life, and thereby, he comes to release
from himself a large quantity of his psychic vitality. In this
stanza it is said that, when a meditator controls his mind
432
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and 'constantly' (Sada) keeps his mind away from its
agitations, he can easily and surely reach the Supreme.
The term 'always' (Sada) should not be misunderstood as
suggesting that the practitioner should live, criminally
neglecting all his duties towards his home and the world
around himself. Here the term 'always' only connotes "a
duration of constant and consistent inner silence," during
one's meditation. At the peak of meditation, the
practitioner comes to a point of perfect 'halt'.
The individual comes to experience infinite peace which is
"the peace that resides in him." The Self is Peace Absolute
(Shantam), inasmuch as the processes of physical
excitements, mental agitations and intellectual
disturbances are not in the Self, It being beyond these
matter-envelopments. Here it may look as though Krishna
is advocating the dualistic school of philosophy, since it is
said: "The meditator reaches the peace that is My own
nature." To conceive of a Truth having qualities, is to
reduce the Eternal to the finite status of a substance
(dravya). Again, if the meditator experiences "THE PEACE
THAT RESIDES IN ME," then the goal gained becomes an
'object' apart from the meditator.
The subtle philosopher, Sri Krishna, recognises this
unavoidable imperfection of the spoken language, and
therefore, he tries to neutralize the fallacy in his
expressions by the significant terms "the Peace, that
433
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ultimately culminates in the Supreme liberation" (Nirvana-
paramam).
In short, when the meditator has come to the moment of
perfect silence within, he comes to experience, at first, a
peace that is unknown in the world without. Soon, as it
were, the experiencer gets slowly acted upon and digested
into the very substance of the Truth, whose fragrance was
the Peace, which the dying ego of the meditator seemed to
experience at the gateway of its own Real Divine Nature.
In fact in the last stage of fulfilment in meditation, the
meditator 'awakens' to his status of Self-hood. This Advaita
experience is the one fact that has been repeated and
emphasised all through Krishna's Song Divine.
FOLLOWING ARE THE REGULATIONS, AS REGARDS
THE MEDITATOR'S FOOD, ETC:
16. Verily, YOGA is not possible for him who eats too much,
nor for him who does not eat at all; nor for him who sleeps too
much, nor for him who is (always) awake, O Arjuna.
When the above technique and goal are so clearly given
out, one is apt to wonder at one's own incapacity to reach
anywhere near the indicated goal, in spite of the fact that
one has been sincerely and constantly meditating upon it
for a number of years. What exactly is the behaviour that
unconsciously takes a seeker away from the grand road to
success? No scientific theory is complete unless it
434
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
enumerates the various precautions that are to be taken
for achieving complete success. The next few stanzas warn
us of all the possible pitfalls on the path of the Dhyana
Yoga.
Moderation in indulgence and activities at all levels of
one's personality is an imperative requisite, which alone
can assure true success in meditation. Intemperance
would bring discordant and riotous agitations in the
various matter layers of the personality, shattering the
harmonious melody of integration. Therefore, strict
moderation in food, sleep and recreation is enjoined:
everything should be well-measured and completely
defined.
YOGA IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR HIM WHO EATS TOO
MUCH NOR FOR HIM WHO DOES NOT EAT AT ALL --
- Here, the term 'eat' should be understood in its
comprehensive meaning as including all sense
enjoyments, mental feelings, and intellectual perceptions.
It is not only the process of consuming things through the
mouth; it includes the enjoyments gained through all the
avenues of sense perceptions and inward experiences.
Drawing our conclusions from these standards, we may
understand the rule to be: "Eat whatever comes to us
handy, without creating unnecessary destruction to the
living kingdom just for our personal existence, and
intelligently consume a quantity which does not load the
435
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stomach." This is the golden rule of diet for a successful
meditator.
It is rightly said that neither 'too much sleep' --- which
unnecessarily dulls our faculties and renders the
individual more and more gross --- nor 'no sleep at all' is
the right policy for a student in spiritual life. Intelligent
moderation is the law.
THIS STANZA MIGHT CONFUSE THE DULL-WITTED,
AND THEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING VERSE
ANSWERS THE QUESTION: "HOW THEN CAN YOGA
BE ACHIEVED?"
17. YOGA becomes the destroyer of pain for him who is
moderate in eating and recreation, who is moderate in his
exertion during his actions, who is moderate in sleep and
wakefulness.
This stanza plans the life, living which, Yoga can be more
successfully cultivated. Moderation in eating and
recreation, in sleep and activities, is the prescription that
has been insisted upon for Yoga by the Lord.
In indicating the blessed life of temperance and self-
control, Krishna has used such a select vocabulary that the
words have the fragrance of an ampler suggestiveness. An
ordinary seeker takes to some sacred work in a misguided
belief that "selfless work" will create in him more
436
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
worthiness for his spiritual life. Many seekers have I met,
who have, in the long run, fallen a prey to their own
activities because of this false notion. In this stanza, we
have a clear direction as to how to avoid the victimization
of ourselves by the work that we undertake.
Not only must we be temperate --- discriminately careful
in choosing the right field of activity --- but we must also
see that the EFFORTS that we put into that activity are
moderate (cheshtasya). Having selected a divine work, if
we get bound and enslaved in its programme of effort, the
chances are that the work, instead of redeeming us
from our existing vasanas, will create in us more and more
new tendencies, and in the exhaustion created by the
work, we will slowly sink into agitations and, perhaps,
even into animalism.
When Krishna wants to indicate the Absolute necessity for
moderation regarding sleep and wakefulness, the phrases
which he uses are very significant. 'Swapna' is the term
used for indicating that total conscious life of the ego's
active experience in the world. Elsewhere, in the
Upanishads also, the entire life's experiences have been
classified under the 'state of sleep' (the non-apprehension
of Reality) and the 'state of dream, (the mis-apprehension
of Reality) wherein the waking state is also included.
The term Avabodha, used here, echoes the scriptural goal
explained as Absolute Knowledge. To all intelligent and
437
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
serious students of the Upanishads, the term, as used here,
carries a secret message; that the meditator should not
over-indulge either in the life of mis-apprehensions nor in
those deep silent moments of pure meditation --- the
moments of Avabodha. Krishna indicates that Sadhakas,
during their early practices, should not over-indulge in
the world of their perceptions nor try to practise
meditation for too long and weary hours and force inner
silence.
In the same stanza, by two insignificant-looking words,
Krishna has conveyed to all generations of Geeta students,
an indication why Yoga is to be practised at all. "IT IS
CAPABLE OF DESTROYING ALL MISERIES."
WHEN DOES ONE BECOME A SAINT PERFECTLY
STEADFAST (YUKTAH)?
18. When the perfectly controlled mind rests in the Self only,
free from longing for all (objects of) desire, then it is said: "he is
united" (YUKTAH) .
This and the following five stanzas are a dissertation on
the fruits of Yoga and they explain what a perfect
meditator can gain in life, and what his experiences are
while living in this world during and after his spiritual
realisation.
438
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Throughout the Geeta, so far, Krishna has been stressing
the necessity of one quality, steadfastness (yuktah). A
complete and exhaustive definition has not so far been
given to explain this crucial term, although sufficient hints
have been thrown in here and there, to indicate the nature
of the man who is steadfast in devotion and Yoga; here we
have almost a complete definition of it.
When the mind is completely under control, the stanza
claims, it "RESTS SERENELY IN THE SELF ALONE." A
little reflection can bring the truth of the statement into
our easy comprehension. An uncontrolled mind is one
which frantically gallops on, seeking satisfaction among
the sense-objects. We have already been told that the mind
can be withdrawn from its preoccupations with its usual
sense-objects, only when it is firmly tied down to the
contemplation of the Self, which is the Eternal Substratum,
the Conscious Principle that illumines all perceptions and
experiences. Naturally therefore, a mind that is fully
controlled is a mind which has lost itself, as it were, in the
steady and continuous contemplation upon the Self.
The above explanation is endorsed by the second line of
the stanza which gives us an inkling as to the means by
which we can fix our mind on the Supreme. "FREE FROM
LONGING AFTER ALL DESIRES" --- is the means that
has been suggested repeatedly throughout the Lord's
Song. It is unfortunate that hasty commentators have
unconsciously, come to over-emphasize the "renunciation
of all desires" as the cardinal virtue in Hinduism. There is
439
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
an ocean of difference between the 'DESIRES' and the
'LONGING AFTER DESIRES.' Desires in themselves are
not unhealthy, nor can they actually bring about any
sorrow unto us. But the disproportionate amount of our
clinging to our desires is the cancer of the mind that
brings about all the mortal agonies into life.
For example, desire for wealth is healthy, inasmuch as it
encourages the mind to act and to accomplish, to acquire
and to keep, to earn and to save. But when desire
POSSESSES an individual in such a way that he becomes
almost hysterical with over-anxiety, it makes him
incompetent to put forth any substantial creative effort
and accomplish glories worthy of the dignity of man.
A desire in itself cannot and does not bring about storms
in the mind, as our longing after those very same desires
does. The Geeta advises us only to renounce our
YEARNINGS for all objects of desires.
Through discrimination and proper intellectual evaluation
of the sense-objects, when an individual has withdrawn
his mind from its usual sense-gutters, the mind comes to
take hold of the subtler and the diviner theme of the Self
for its contemplation. The limited and the finite sense-
objects agitate the mind, while the Unlimited and the
Infinite Self brings peace and joy into it. This condition of
sense-withdrawal and the entry of the mind into the Self is
called its condition of steadfastness (Yuktah). Such an
individual has a fully integrated (Yuktah) personality.
440
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
SUCH A YOGIN'S INTEGRATED MIND IS DESCRIBED
BELOW:
19. " As a lamp placed in a windless place does not flicker" --- is
a simile used to describe the YOGI of controlled-mind,
practising YOGA of the Self (or absorbed in th e YOGA -of-
the-Self) .
As an efficient complement to the previous verse, this
stanza explains the mind of the Yogi of collected thoughts,
who is absorbed in Yoga. This explanation is given
through the help of a famous simile: "as a lamp in a spot
sheltered from the wind does not flicker." The example is
quite appropriate inasmuch as the mind is fickle and
unsteady as the tip of a flame. Thoughts appear in the
mind every second, in a continuous stream, and these
constant thought disturbances --- each dying, yielding its
place to a new one --- give us the apprehension of a solid
factor called the mind. Similarly, the tip of a flame also, (it
can be experimentally proved) is never steady, but the
flickering is so fast, that it gives us an illusion of a definite
shape and solidity.
When this flame is well protected from the fickle breeze, it
becomes steady in its upward flight. In the same fashion
the flame of the mind, flickering at the whims and fancies
of the passing sensuous desires, when arrested in
meditation, becomes steadily brilliant although its
thoughts are employed in the contemplation of the Self by
441
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a constant flow of Brahmakara Vritti. In short, repeated and
constant thoughts of Brahman --- Vast and Infinite, Eternal
and Blissful, the Substratum for the entire Universe --- is
the "Yoga of the Self (Yogam atmanah).
HAVING THUS, THROUGH MEDITATION, BECOME
SINGLE-POINTED, WHAT WOULD BE THE STAGES OF
PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED? THIS IS DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING FOUR STANZAS:
20. When the mind, restrained by the practice of YOGA, attains
quietude and when seeing the Self by the self, he is satisfied in
his own Self;
21. When he (the YOGI ) feels that Infinite bliss --- which can
be grasped by the (pure) intellect and which transcends the
senses --- wherein established he never moves from the Reality;
22. Which, having obtained, he thinks there is no other gain
superior to it; wherein established, he is not moved even by
heavy sorrow.
23. Let it be known: the severance from the union-with-pain is
YOGA. This YOGA should be practised with determination
and with a mind steady and undespairing.
These four verses together give a complete picture of the
state of Yoga and Krishna ends with a very powerful call
to man that everyone should practise this Yoga of
442
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Meditation and self-development. In order to encourage
man and make him walk this noble path of self-
development and self-mastery, Bhagawan explains the
goal which is gained by the meditator. When the mind is
completely restrained, as explained in the above four
stanzas, it attains a serene quietude and in that silence
gains the experience of the Self, not as anything separate
from itself, but as its own true nature.
This self-rediscovery of the mind, that is in fact nothing
other than the Divine Conscious Principle, is the State of
Infinite Bliss. This awakening to the cognition of the Self
can take place only when the individual ego has smashed
its limiting adjuncts and has thereby transcended its
identifications with the body, mind and intellect.
That this bliss is not an objective experience such as is
gained among the pleasures of the world, is evident by the
qualification that it "transcends the senses" (Ati-indriyah).
Ordinarily we gain our experiences in the world outside
through our sense-organs. When the spiritual masters
promise that Self-Realisation is a State of Bliss, we are
tempted to accept it as an objective goal, but when they
say that it is beyond the senses, the seekers start feeling
that the promises of religion are mere bluff. The stanza,
therefore, has to clearly insist that this Bliss of Self-
recognition is perceivable only through the pure intellect.
A doubt may now arise that when, as a result of these
almost super-human efforts, an individual has at last,
443
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
come to experience this transcendental Bliss, it may
provide only a flashy moment of intense living, which
may then disappear, demanding, all over again, similar
super-human efforts to regain one more similar moment
of Bliss-experience. To remove this possible
misunderstanding, the stanza insists: "ESTABLISHED
WHEREIN, HE NEVER DEPARTS FROM HIS REAL
STATE." The Geeta repeatedly endorses that the
experience of the Self is an enduring state from which
there is no return.
Even supposing one has gained this Infinite Bliss, will he
not again come to all the sorrows that are natural to every
worldly being? Will he not thereafter feel as great an urge
as anyone else to strive and struggle, to earn and hoard,
and thirst to love and be loved, etc.? All these excitements
which are carbuncles upon the shoulders of an imperfect
man, are denied to a perfect one, as the following stanza
(VI-22) explains the Supreme Truth as "HAVING COME
TO WHICH NO ONE CAN CONSIDER ANY OTHER
GAIN AS EQUAL TO IT, MUCH LESS EVER
ANYTHING GREATER."
Even after these explanations the Lord Himself raises the
question which a man of doubts may entertain. It will be
quite natural for a student, who is striving to understand
Vedanta purely through his intellect, to doubt as to
whether the experience of Divinity can be maintained,
even during moments of stress and sorrow and in periods
of misery and mourning. In other words: is not religion a
444
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mere luxury of the rich and the powerful, a superstitious
satisfaction for the weak, a make-believe dream-heaven
for the escapist? Can religion and its promised perfection
stand unperturbed in all our challenges of life:
bereavements, losses, illness, penury, starvation? This
doubt --- which is quite common in our times too --- has
been unequivocally answered here with a daring
statement that "WHEREIN BEING ESTABLISHED ONE IS
NOT MOVED EVEN BY THE HEAVIEST SORROW."
To summarise: when by the quietude of the mind, gained
through concentration, one comes to rediscover one's own
Self, his is the Bliss Absolute, which cannot be perceived
through the senses and yet, can be lived, through a 'pure
intellect,' and having reached which there is no more any
return; having gained which there is no greater gain to
strive for; and which is not shaken even by the lashings of
the greatest tragedies of our existence. This is the
wondrous Truth that has been indicated as the Self by the
Geeta, the goal of all men of discrimination and spiritual
aspirations.
This Self is to be known. The means of knowing this goal,
as well as the state of its experience, is called "Yoga" in the
Geeta. (VI --- 23). Here we have one of the noblest, if
revolutionary, definitions of Yoga.
We have explained earlier how the Geeta is an
incomparable re-statement of the declaration of the
Upanishads, in the context of the Hindu-world available at
445
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the time of the Mahabharata. The old idea that Yoga is a
strange phenomenon, too difficult for the ordinary man to
practise or to come to experience, has been remodelled
here to a more tolerant and all-comprehensive definition.
Yoga, which was till then a technique of religious self-
perfection available only for a reserved few, has now been
made a public park into which everyone can enter at his
free will and entertain himself as best he can. In this sense
of the term, the Geeta has been rightly called a
revolutionary Bible of the Hindu Renaissance.
Apart from the divine prerogative of one who is an
incarnation, we find a brilliant dash of revolutionary zeal
in Krishna's Godly personality both in His emotions and
His actions. When such a divine revolutionary enters the
fields of culture and spirituality, He could not have given
a more spectacular definition of Yoga than that which He
has given us here: "Yoga --- a state of disunion from every
union-with-pain." This re-interpretation of Yoga not only
provides us with a striking definition but at the same time,
it is couched in such a clapping language of contradiction
that it arrests the attention of every student and makes
him think for himself.
The term "Yoga" means "contact." To-day, man in his
imperfection has contacts with only the world of finite
objects and therefore, he ekes out of life only finite joys.
These objects of the world are contacted through the
instruments of man's body, mind and intellect. Joy ended
446
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is the birth of sorrow. Therefore, life through the matter
vestures is the life of pain-Yoga (dukha samyoga).
Detachment from this pain --- Yoga is naturally a process
in which we disconnect (Viyoga) ourselves from the fields
of objects and their experiences. A total or even a partial
divorce from the perceptions of the world of objects is not
possible, as long as we are using the mechanism of
perception, the organ of feeling, and the instrument of
thinking. To get detached from the mechanism of
perceptions, feelings and thoughts, would naturally be the
total detachment from the pain-Yoga --- (Dukha-Samyoga-
Viyoga).
Existence of the mind is possible only through its
attachment; the mind can never live without attaching
itself to some object or other. Detachment from one object
is possible for the mind only when it has attached itself to
another. For the mind, detachment from pain caused by
the unreal is possible only when it gets attached to the
Bliss, that is the Nature of the Real. In this sense, the true
Yoga --- which is the seeking and establishing an enduring
attachment with the Real --- is gained only when the
seeker cries a halt in his onward march towards pain, and
deliberately takes a 'right-about-turn' to proceed towards
the Real and the Permanent in himself. This wonderful
idea has been most expressively brought out in the phrase
which Bhagawan employs here, as a definition of Yoga ---
(Dukha-Samyoga-Viyoga).
447
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
A little scrutiny will enable us to realise that in defining
Yoga thus, Sri Krishna has not introduced any new
ideology into the stock of knowledge that was the
traditional wealth of the Hindu scriptures. Till then, Yoga
was emphasized from the standpoint of its goal, rather
than from the exploration of its means. This over-
emphasis of the goal had frightened the faithful followers
away from its salutory blessings. And the technique of
Yoga had sunk to become a mysterious and a very secret
practice meant only for a few.
This Yoga is to be practised, insists Krishna, with "AN
EAGER AND DECISIVE MIND." To practise with firm
resolve and an undespairing heart is the simple secret for
the highest success in the practice of meditation, as the
"Yoga with the Truth" is gained through a total successful
"Viyoga from the false."
If we feel uncomfortably warm by being very near the
fire-place we have only to move away from it to reach the
cool and comforting atmosphere. Similarly, if, to live
among the finite objects and live its limited joys is sorrow,
then
to get away from them is to enter into the Realm of Bliss
which is the Self. This is "Yoga."
FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING YOGA ARE
NOW CONTINUED AFTER THE ABOVE SHORT
DIGRESSION. MOREOVER:
448
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
24. Abandoning without reserve all desires born of
SANKALPA, and completely restraining the whole group of
senses by the mind from all sides.
25. Little by little, let him attain quietude by his intellect, held
firm; having made the mind established in the Self, let him not
think of anything.
In the previous section the entire goal of Yoga was
indicated as that state "WHEREIN THE MIND,
THROUGH THE PRACTICE OF CONCENTRATION,
COMES TO GET ITSELF ABSOLUTELY RESTRAINED."
Later on, we have been given a glorious word-picture of
the state of enjoyment and perfection that one will get
introduced into, in this state of meditation. This
theoretical exposition has no practical value unless
exhaustive instructions are given, as to how a diligent
seeker can bring about this total mental poise, consciously,
in a deliberate spiritual act of perfect self-control.
In these two brilliant stanzas the subtle art of meditation
has been explained. The secrets of how to bring the mind
to single-pointedness, and what to do thereafter with that
mind in concentration and how to approach the Truth and
ultimately realise It in an act of deliberate and conscious
becoming --- are all exhaustively indicated in these two
significant stanzas.
449
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Renouncing 'all' (Sarvan) desires 'fully' (Asheshatah) by the
mind, control all the sense-organs from their entire world
of sense-objects. Herein, every word demands a
commentary, since every phrase leaves a hint which is so
important in ultimately assuring the seeker a complete
success. It is not only sufficient that ALL desires are
renounced, but each desire must be TOTALLY eradicated.
By these two terms (Sarvan and Asheshatah), no trace of
doubt is left in the mind of the seekers, as to the condition
of their mental equipoise, during moments of higher
meditation. The term Asheshatah means that even the
desire for this perfection in "Yoga" is to be, in the end,
totally renounced!
"Renunciation of desire" is advised here as a very
necessary and important qualification; but unfortunately,
the unintelligent ignored this significant qualification, and
perverted our sacred religion by acting and behaving as
though it recommended a life of indolence with neither
any ambition to achieve, nor any desire to accomplish.
The term "BORN OF SANKALPA" is a very significant
term qualifying the desires that are to be renounced totally
and fully. The term 'Sankalpa' has already been explained
earlier (VI-2) --- so here the terms used mean that it is "the
renunciation of all agitation-breeding desires."
When once this renunciation of disturbing desires has
been accomplished, the individual's mind gains strength
and stamina to assert itself, at first to make the wild horses
of the sense-organs tame so that they run under greater
450
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
control and then to restrain all the sense-organs from all
sense-objects from all sides.
It is scientifically very true that our mind is not able to
control our sense-organs, for it has been rendered weak
and thoroughly impotent due to the permanent agitations
caused by its own false desires. Once the mind gets strong,
as a result of its conquest over desires, it discovers in itself
all the strength and capacity to control the Indriyas from
all sides. This process of quietening the mind can never be
accomplished by any hasty action or by any imagination,
or by any strange and mysterious method. It is clearly
indicated by the very insistence that the Geeta makes in
this stanza, that the seeker should "ATTAIN QUIETUDE
AS A RESULT OF HIS WITHDRAWAL FROM THE
WORLD OF SENSE-OBJECTS, BY DEGREES." Slowly,
slowly (Shanaih-Shanaih), the mind gains more and more
quietude.
No doubt, when the sense-organs have stopped their mad
onrush to their respective sense-objects, a certain amount
of mental quietude is gained. The methods of intensifying
this inner peace have been indicated in this stanza.
"PATIENTLY, WITH THE INTELLECT THE MIND IS TO
BE CONTROLLED, AND RESTED IN THE
CONTEMPLATION OF THE SELF." This advice is
extremely important to every seeker as it gives the next
item of the programme for a meditator, when he has
accomplished, through the exertion of the mind during his
451
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
meditation, a total withdrawal of himself from the sense-
world. A total rejection of the sense-world is possible only
during meditation.
The mind that is thus brought to a relative quietude is
next to be controlled by the still subtler personality layer
in the meditator, which is his intellect. Just as the sense-
organs are controlled and restrained by the mind, the
mind is now treated by the discriminating intellect and
brought under complete restraint. The mind cannot be
restrained except by fixing its entire attention on one idea
to the total exclusion of all other ideas. The mind is
"THOUGHT-FLOW" and as such, the constant thought of
the Nature of the Self, is to be the exercise by which the
mind should be restrained by the intellect. A mind that
has merged in the steady contemplation of the Self
becomes still, and a divine quietude comes to pervade its
very substance. This is the last lap of the journey to which
deliberate and conscious action (Purushartha) can take any
seeker.
Krishna's exhaustive theory, which can be practised by
any sincere devotee, concludes in these two stanzas with a
warning as to what the seeker should avoid at his moment
of inward silence and peace; the Lord does not instruct the
seeker here on what he should positively do. The Divine
Flute-player says, "LET HIM NOT THINK OF
ANYTHING," when he has once reached this state of
peace within.
452
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
After the "halt-moment" there is nothing more for the
seeker to act and achieve. All that he has to do is to avoid
starting any new line of imagination. "UNDISTURBED BY
ANY NEW THOUGHT WAVE, LET HIM MAINTAIN
HIS INNER SILENCE AND COME TO LIVE IT MORE
AND MORE DEEPLY," is all the instruction that the
technique of meditation gives to the meditator. "Knock
and thou shalt enter" is the promise; you have 'knocked,'
and into the Supreme Presence, thou shalt enter... ere long
(Achirena).
No two simple looking stanzas, anywhere in the spiritual
literature of the world, including the sacred books in
Hinduism, can claim to have given such an exhaustive
wealth of useful instructions to a seeker, as these two
stanzas in the Geeta. Even in the entire bulk of the Divine
Song (Geeta) itself, there is no other similar couple of
stanzas which can, in their pregnant import, stand a
favourable comparison with this perfect pair.
AS AN INSTRUCTION TO THOSE WHO HAVE A
FICKLE, UNSTEADY MIND, THE FOLLOWING IS
ADDED:
26. From whatever cause the restless and the unsteady mind
wanders away, from that let him restrain it, and bring it back
under the control of the Self alone.
453
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Every student who tries to understand the above two
verses and tries to put them into practice will despair at
his own incapacity to control the mind and fix it
constantly in the contemplation of the Self. In utter
despair, every seeker will realise that the mind irresistibly
wanders away from its point-of-concentration because the
mind is, by its very nature, "restless" (Chanchala) and
"unsteady" (A-sthira). It can neither constantly think of one
object nor consistently think of different objects. By these
two terms qualifying the mind --- restlessness and
unsteadiness --- Krishna has brought out a vivid and a
very realistic picture of the mind, as it is experienced by
all true seekers striving on the path of Meditation. These
two phrases are so impressive that later on Arjuna
himself, while crystallising his doubts into language, uses
them quite naturally.
Thus, during practice, even though the seeker has brought
his sense-organs to a large extent under his control, still
the mind, disturbed by the memories of its past
experiences, will shoot out in search of sense-objects.
These are the moments of dejection and despair for the
seekers. These wanderings of the mind may be due to
very many reasons: the memory of the past, the vicinity of
some tempting objects, the association of ideas, some
attachment or aversion, or maybe, even the very spiritual
aspiration of the seeker. Lord Krishna's instruction here is
very categorical and all-embracing. He says "WHATEVER
BE THE REASON BECAUSE OF WHICH THE RESTLESS
AND THE UNSTEADY MIND WANDERS AWAY," the
454
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seeker is not to despair, but should understand that it is
the nature of the mind to wander, and that the very
process of meditation is only a technique to stop this
wandering.
LET HIM BRING IT BACK --- The seeker is advised to
bring back the mind that has rushed out into dissimilar
channels of thinking. This withdrawal of the mind by
sheer will-power may be successful to a degree, but as
soon as it is brought back, it will, and it should, rush out
again into another fanciful line of thinking. Very rarely do
the Sadhakas realise that the mind means "the flow-of-
thought." A steady, motionless mind is no mind at all!
Therefore, in the technique of meditation, when the mind
is withdrawn from the sense-objects, this very process of
withdrawal is to be completed by a conscious effort on the
part of the meditator, in applying the same mind, at once,
in the contemplation of the Self. This idea has been
remarkably well brought out when the Lord complements
his instruction by the term "BRINGING IT UNDER THE
SWAY OF THE SELF ALONE."
THE FOLLOWING FEW STANZAS EXPLAIN THE
EFFECT OF THE 'YOGA' OF MEDITATION UPON ITS
TRUE PRACTITIONERS:
27. Supreme Bliss verily comes to this YOGI, whose mind is
quite peaceful, whose passion is quietened, who is free from sin,
and who has become BRAHMAN.
455
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
As we have just indicated in the previous stanza, when an
individual's mind has been arrested from its agitated
roamings in the world-of-objects, and fixed consistently
upon the Self, by degrees the mind gathers more and more
quietude and ultimately, when the flow of thoughts
ceases, the mind also ends. Where the mind has ended,
there the individual is awakened to the experience of the
Infinite Nature of the Self. Naturally, the Meditator (Yogin)
"COMES TO THE SUPREME BLISS."
An intelligent enquirer has every right to question this
assertion; for, in a true science, the scientist has no right to
assert his own opinion and to expect the students to
swallow it. In the second line of the verse, the reasons are
given to show how and why the quietened mind becomes
an open-window through which the prospect of the Self
comes to our view. A mind, thus held steadily in the inner
atmosphere of thrilled silence, comes to drop off all its
previous vasanas; the mind gets "FREED FROM TAINT"
(A-kalmasham).
In Vedanta, technically the "impurities" of the mind are
called mala, and it is considered as constituted of
"SPIRITUAL NON-APPREHENSION" and the consequent
"MENTAL AGITATIONS." The "veiling power" (Avarana)
generated by the inertia of the intellect (Tamas), creates in
its wake the disturbing "agitations" (Vikshepa) in the
mental zone. The agitation-nuisance in the mind is most
prominent when it is under the influence of Rajo-guna.
This Vedantic theory, explaining "the fall of man" into
456
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sorrow, is fully echoed in the words of the Lord here: (a)
"passions quietened" (Shanta-rajasam) and (b) "freed from
taint" (A-kalmasham).
An individual in whom all "agitations" have ceased, and
consequently, who has become perfectly freed from his
"ignorance" of the Reality, should naturally be considered
as one who has regained his "Knowledge of the Self." As
long as there is agitation, so long there is the mind; and
the Self identified with the mind, is the ego --- the seeker
who started meditating. When, as it has been explained,
the meditator has exposed his mind to the atmosphere of
inner peace and quietude, he comes to end completely all
his mental agitations, and therefore, the ego rediscovers
itself to be nothing other than the Self. This non-dual-
Truth has been openly declared by the Lord through His
brilliant phrase "Brahman-become" (Brahma-bhootam) in
describing the man of Self-realisation.
HAVING THUS EXPLAINED THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF
A TRUE MEDITATOR THE LORD EXPLAINS HOW
THIS EXPERIENCE OF THE SELF CAN BE,
THEREAFTER, THE CONSTANT LIFE OF THE PERFECT
ONE:
28. The YOGI engaging the mind thus (in the practice of
YOGA ) , freed from sins, easily enjoys the Infinite Bliss of
'BRAHMAN -contact. '
457
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Engaging himself thus in the battle for evolution and
inward mastery, a meditator steadily grows out of the
shadowy regions of his own spiritual ignorance and
imperfections, to smile forth in luxurious extravagance
into the sparkling sunshine of Knowledge. When the
meditator keeps his mind undisturbed in the roaring
silence within, in the white-heat of meditation, his mind
gets purified, like a piece of iron in the smithy furnace. In
short, as we said earlier, and elsewhere, the "halt-moment"
is the frontier-line upto which human-effort can raise the
mind. There it ends itself just as a balloon, as it goes
higher and higher, blasts itself in the rarified atmosphere
of higher altitudes, and drops down, merging the balloon-
space with the space outside. Similarly, the mind too, at
the pinnacle of meditation, shatters itself, drops the ego
down and merges with the Supreme. Just as the space in
the balloon automatically merges with the space outside
when it has exploded, so too, when the finite mind is
ended, "WITH EASE IT ATTAINS THE INFINITE BLISS
ARISING OUT OF ITS CONTACT-WITH-BRAHMAN."
Krishna is here trying to make an agitated, restless,
inquisitive intellect understand that positive and dynamic
Reality, which can and shall be gained when the mind and
intellect are transcended. Had he said 'THE SEEKER
WILL BECOME HAPPINESS,' Arjuna would have
hesitated to accept it, believing that in the Self there is no
positive joy. To make his unprepared intellect perceive the
experienceable joy of the Infinite, the Divine Cowherd has
to borrow a vivid phrase from ordinary life and so he says
458
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
that the meditator "ATTAINS THE INFINITE BLISS
THROUGH THE BRAHMAN-CONTACT." This phrase
"Brahman-contact" should be understood as "Self-contact" -
-- in contrast to the finite joys which we ordinarily gain in
life through the "not-Self-contact."
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS WE GET A
DESCRIPTION OF THE EFFECTS OF YOGA AND THE
CONSEQUENT PERCEPTION OF ONENESS IN THE
PLURALISTIC WORLD:
29. With the mind harmonised by YOGA he sees the Self
abiding in all beings, and all beings in the Self; he sees the same
everywhere.
All religions in the world are great, but indeed, none of
them is so perfect as the religion of Vedanta, if by religion
we mean the "Science of Self-perfection". In this stanza, the
author of the Geeta says, in unequivocal terms, that the
perfect man of Self-knowledge or God-realisation is not
merely one who has realised his own divinity, but is also
one who has equally understood and has come to live in
an intimate knowledge and experience of the divinity
inherent in all creatures, without any distinction
whatsoever. The Awareness in us is the Awareness
everywhere in all names and forms and this Divine
Awareness is the very essence in the entire world of
perceptions and experience. To contact the Infinite in us, is
to contact the Eternal everywhere.
459
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
To a true man of realisation, in Hinduism, there is no
more a world to be addressed, even be it in divine
compassion, by the disgusting phrase: "O! Ye Children of
Sin!" Rama Tirtha, a Hindu Saint of Perfection, could not
but address the entire living kingdom as "O! Children of
Light!" This idea of the consummate revelation of "God-I
am" gained by the meditator is the Peak of Perfection
endorsed and aimed at by the Hindu Seers. This idea has
been most effectively brought out in this stanza.
That this pluralistic phenomenon is a manifestation of and
a projection upon the Immortal Truth is very well brought
out in almost all the Geeta chapters. The essence in all
names and forms, thus, is the same transcendental Self.
Just as the mud in all mud-pots, the gold in all gold
ornaments, the ocean in all waves, the electricity in all
bulbs, the Self is the Essence in and the Substratum for the
entire world of objects.
From the physical body we perceive the physical world,
and from our emotional level we perceive the emotions in
others. So too, from our intellectual level alone, can we
intelligently contact the ideas in other intellects. As
asserted in the previous chapter, when an individual
transcends his intellect, he rediscovers his own Divine
Nature, and from that Spiritual Centre, when he looks out,
he finds the Self pervading everywhere. The meditator, on
transcending his intellect, becomes the Self; and to the Self
there is nothing but the Self everywhere. To the mud,
460
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
there are no pots; to the gold, there are no ornaments
separate from itself.
With this understanding in our mind, the stanza becomes
quite clear when it says: "HE BEHOLDS THE SELF IN
ALL BEINGS AND EQUALLY BEHOLDS ALL BEINGS
IN THE SELF." Such a Perfect One, who has realised the
Unity in the world of diversity, alone can afford to
entertain the equality of vision in all circumstances and
conditions --- "on a noble Brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a
dog and a Pariah" (V-18).
NOW WILL BE DESCRIBED THE EFFECT OF THIS
PERCEPTION OF UNITY OF THE SELF:
30. He who sees Me everywhere, and sees everything in Me, he
never gets separated from Me, nor do I get separated from him.
Earlier we were told that on reaching his goal, the
meditator "ATTAINS INFINITE BLISS OF THE
'BRAHMAN'-CONTACT" (V-28). We explained that the
term 'contact' indicates only the non-dual Reality, which is
the theme of all the Upanishads. Here, in this stanza, we
have Krishna's own commentary upon that term. Once
having awakened to the Self, the Perfect Master thereafter
recognises everywhere nothing but the Self.
HE WHO SEES ME IN ALL THINGS AND SEES ALL
THINGS IN ME --- In this stanza, as everywhere else, the
461
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
first person singular 'I' and 'Me' are to be understood as
the Self. To one who is re-reading the stanza in the light of
this annotation, this and the previous stanza together
express more fully the pregnant meaning of the most
famous Upanishadic declarations found in the Ishavasya.
HE NEVER BECOMES SEPARATED FROM ME --- On
transcending the intellect, the experience of the ego is not
that it sees or perceives or cognises the Eternal but that it
discovers itself in essence to be nothing but the Self
(Shivoham). The dreamer, on awakening, himself becomes
the waker; a dreamer can never see or recognise the waker
as separate from himself.
NOR DO I BECOME SEPARATE FROM HIM --- The
dualists are rather hesitant to accept that Infinite Divinity
is their Real Nature, for they are, as ego-centres, conscious
of their own bodily vanities and sins. In no clearer terms
can we more exhaustively describe the unadulterated
Truth of the Essential Divinity in man. Lord Krishna here,
is in no way trying to conceal His meaning that a
meditator, when he has fulfilled the process of
detachment from the not-Self, himself BECOMES the
Eternal and the Infinite. It may be a staggering truth, but
all the same it is The Truth. Those who are hesitating and
wavering may well continue to disbelieve their own
divine potentialities. But the intimate experience of the
long hierarchy of Gurus in India and the mystic Saints all
over the world has endorsed this unbelievable, yet plain
462
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Truth that, "the Self in an individual is the same Self
everywhere."
At present we are divorced from ourselves; the ego is a
rebel who has exiled himself from his native kingdom, the
Self. On rediscovery of the Self, the ego BECOMES the Self
in such a happy blending that thereafter there is no
distinction between the ego and the Self. On awakening,
the dreamer becomes the waker; not only does the
dreamer become the waker, but the waker can never
remain separate from the dreamer. In ordinary divorces
either party can divorce the other, and yet maintain an
emotional relationship with each other. Here the Lord
says, not only does the seeker come to feel the Self-hood,
but I, the Self, become homogeneously one with him.
In fact, once we understand that "Misguided God is a
man," it becomes amply clear that, rightly guided, a man
rediscovers himself to be nothing other than the Supreme.
An actor playing the part of a beggar, is not really a
beggar; the moment he drops the part he is playing, he
becomes what in fact he is. In fact, even while he was
playing his role, he was not a beggar. This daring
declaration of Vedanta is not at all difficult to understand,
but the deluded are aghast at this revelation, and in their
imperfections, refuse to believe this Truth. They have not
the guts to take the responsibilities of living a Godly life.
Krishna's courageous statement in this stanza leaves not
even a pin-hole of a doubt on this sacred conclusion of all
463
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the scriptures of the world, especially that of the immortal
Upanishads.
EMPHASISING THE IDEA THAT THE MAN OF
PERFECT SELF-CONTROL AND MEDITATION, ON
REALISING THE SELF "BECOMES THE SELF," THE
FOLLOWING IS ADDED:
31. He who, being established in unity, worships Me, dwelling
in all beings, that YOGI abides in Me, whatever be his mode of
living.
The meditator who has integrated himself in a single-
pointedness, steadily contemplates (Bhajati) upon Me, the
Self, which is the essential Spark-of-Life in all forms in the
world. Such an individual, whatever be his activities in
the external world, ever lives in 'Me' through a conscious
awareness of the Self. This stanza is given here mainly to
indicate that the Man-of-realisation need not necessarily
retire to some secret cave in some forgotten valley of the
Himalayas, but can maintain his Divine Consciousness in
all states of existence, in all conditions of life, and under
all happy or unhappy circumstances. When a man is ill, he
has to withdraw himself from the fields of activities,
strains, and exhausting recreations, and go to a
sanatorium to recuperate. Having regained his natural
health, he need not thereafter live forever in the
sanatorium. On the other hand, he should come back to
464
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
his old fields of work and live, perhaps a more active life
than ever before.
Similarly, a disintegrated man of unhealthy temperament
is, in spiritual life, treated through meditation, and when
he regains his Godly strength and vitality, he can certainly
re-enter the fields of his earlier activity, and yet maintain
in himself the cultural perfection and spiritual knowledge
that he has gained during his spiritual treatment.
Work, in fact, can be performed and really enduring fruits
be gained, only when the worker is established in the Self.
The message of the Geeta is that dedicated work is a
means of self-development.
There is a deeper significance in the fact that Krishna, the
Perfect, is exposing Himself, perhaps, more to the dangers
of the battle than Prince Arjuna himself. A charioteer
meets the arrows earlier than the warrior who stands
behind him! Entering the battlefield, armed with nothing
but His irresistible smile, He, in effect, almost becomes the
Lord of the battle-field, wherein the entire war, as it were,
comes to revolve round Him, the central personality. This
means that a Man-of-realisation will in all conditions be
able to enter into any activity, and still maintain in himself
the unbroken Awareness of the Divine that he is.
While reading this commentary, some students might feel
that we are, in our over-enthusiasm, reading a bit too
much into the stanza. We can only request them to ponder
465
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
over the comprehensiveness of the words used in the
daring statement: "whatever his mode of life be" (Sarvatha-
vartamanopi) the meditator (Yogin)" abides in Me."
32. He who, through the likeness (sameness) of the Self, O
Arjuna, sees equality everywhere, be it pleasure or pain, he is
regarded as the highest YOGI.
True meditators, well-established in their intellectual
understanding and spiritual experience, intuitively
recognise the Divine Presence immanent in everything.
Such Men of Perfection see in all activities the glory of the
Self and understand their own bodily functions as nothing
but the Grace of the Self. For them, there is no experience
but of the Divine. Everything experienced in the gross
world outside, and in the subtle realm within, is nothing
but an emanation from the Eternal Self.
The highest Yogi, according to the Geeta, is one who feels
the pains and joys of others as intimately as if they were
his own. The famous ethical rule: "Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you" is a most unpleasant
instruction to the average man, because, in his selfishness,
he is easily tempted to ask why he should consider others
as himself. The uninitiated, in his instinctive selfishness,
would naturally be tempted to follow the unethical ways
of life.
466
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The previous few stanzas explained why one should love
one's neighbours. The Yogi, after his experience of the Self,
comes to recognise the whole world as nothing but
himself. As all the limbs and parts of one's body are
equally dear to an individual, one can easily experience
one's intimate identity with all the different parts of the
body. If your tongue were to be accidentally bitten by
your own teeth, you would never think of punishing the
teeth for the crime they had done, for, both IN the tongue
and IN the teeth you pervade equally. Having realised the
Self, when I come to feel everywhere the presence of Me
as the Self, the whole Universe of names and forms
becomes for Me the one integrated form, in which at all
places and at all times, "I alone AM."
Such an individual, who has in his realisation come to feel
the entire universe as his own form, is called a true Yogi
by the Singer of this Celestial Song. In short, a Seer of Self-
realisation instinctively becomes a divinely compassionate
man, producing in society more than what he consumes,
and creating in the community much more than what he
destroys during his lifetime. Love is his very breath,
kindness his very sustenance.
In thus concluding the description of a perfect Yogi, with a
word-picture of the perfect man's attitude to life, and his
relationship with the world outside, Krishna would
fascinate any eagerly listening student; but Arjuna, a
practical man-of-the-world, immediately discovers his
467
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
incapacity to attain the goal pointed out here, and raises
his own doubts, in the form of a question.
SEEING THAT THE YOGA DESCRIBED --- THE YOGA
OF RIGHT KNOWLEDGE --- IS VERY DIFFICULT TO
ATTAIN, ARJUNA WISHES TO KNOW THE SUREST
MEANS OF GAINING THIS YOGA.
Arjuna said: 33. This YOGA of Equanimity, taught by Thee, O
slayer of Madhu, I see not its enduring continuity, because of
the restlessness (of the mind) .
The most practical-minded Aryan that he was, Arjuna, the
man of action, could not at all be moved merely by the
poetic beauty of an ideology. He was thirsty to live, and
therefore, the philosophy of meditation and successful
victory over the cravings of the flesh could not charm him
away to any idle intellectual pursuit. He shot some very
relevant questions to explode the seemingly impractical
philosophy that had been explained in this chapter.
'DETACHMENT FROM PAIN-ATTACHMENTS'
(Duhkhah-samyoga-viyoga) was the definition of "Yoga" that
Krishna provided in this chapter. The process of achieving
success in this "detachment-Yoga" has been explained
herein as the technique of withdrawing the mind from the
objects by lifting it to the planes of higher contemplation.
The theory is that mind, when it comes to a single-pointed
devotion in the contemplation of the Self, becomes stilled
468
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and redeems itself by ending its ego-centric pilgrimage
through the ignorance of Truth, and the consequent mis-
judgement of the world.
The goal pointed out --- perfect equanimity in all
conditions, challenges, and circumstances of life --- is an
admirable gain, but the technique seems to Arjuna to be
sheer poetic fantasy, with no roots in the soil of the
actualities of life. The acute intellect of Arjuna,
systematically approaching the Science of Self-realisation,
discovers as it were, a dangerous missing-link in the chain
of its arguments. Mercilessly, the man-of-war is
hammering at this weak point, with the absolute
confidence that he will immediately expose the
hollowness of Krishna's philosophy.
Thus, Arjuna tauntingly points out: "THIS YOGA WHICH
YOU HAVE BEEN TEACHING ME, WITH SUCH
MENTAL TRANQUILLITY, IS NOT AT ALL
PRACTICABLE." The argument given out by Arjuna and
the daring with which he directly faces his teacher, show
the characteristic spirit of a true student of Vedanta. Blind
faith can gain no entry into the fields of pure spirituality.
The teachers are to answer and clear all the doubts of the
seekers. But, in questioning the philosophy expounded by
a teacher, the student must indicate the logical arguments
by which he had come to feel the particular weakness in
that philosophy. Here, Arjuna gives all his arguments, to
show why the state of evenness of mind would remain
469
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
only a dream, as long as the human mind was, by its very
nature, 'restless' in its own agitations.
In contradicting the Krishna-philosophy, Arjuna is
extremely careful. He does not say that mental equanimity
cannot at all be gained through meditation, but his doubt
is, that it cannot be an experience of "LONG
ENDURANCE." The implication is that, even if after years
of practice the mind were to be won over, the experience
of the Self can only be momentary, and although a full
'experience' of the Infinite can be had in that split-
moment, that direct realisation could not be maintained
by the Man of Knowledge for any length of time, the
mind, being by its very nature, ever restless.
AS IF MAKING HIMSELF MORE CLEAR TO HIS
TEACHER, ARJUNA ADDS THE FOLLOWING STANZA
WHICH, IN FACT, TAKES THE EDGE OFF FROM THE
SPEARHEAD OF HIS LOGIC IN THE PREVIOUS
STANZA:
34. The mind verily is, O Krishna, restless, turbulent, strong
and unyielding; I deem it quite as difficult to control as the
wind.
There is an ocean of difference between a modern man
condemning the sacred scriptures of our land, and a true
seeker questioning the same philosophy, in his honest
attempt to understand the full import, the wealth of
470
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
suggestiveness contained therein. In his acute awareness,
Arjuna realises, deep within himself, his own subjective
experience that a mind cannot be stilled --- "as it is ever
TURBULENT, STRONG and UNYIELDING."
These three terms are quite pregnant in their own import.
Turbulence shows not only the speed in the flow of
thoughts but also their restlessness and agitations, causing
undulating waves rising on the surface. Not only does the
flood of thoughts flow fast and rough, but having reached
its destination at some sense-object or the other, it gets so
powerfully attached to it, that it becomes strong in its new
roots. Mind in turbulence is, no doubt, difficult to arrest;
when it gets strongly rivetted, it is difficult to pluck it
away from its attachments. And the third characteristic
feature of the mind is that, when it has flown into any new
channel of its own choice, for the moment, it is
"unyielding"; and so it is impossible for the individual to
pull it back from its flight and persuade it to stay at any
chosen point-of-concentration. It is to be remembered that
this was the technique advised by Krishna for the practice
of meditation earlier in this chapter (VI-26).
The strength and vigour, the vivacity and treachery, the
penetrativeness and all-pervasiveness of the mind, cannot
be better expressed than by the simile given here "AS THE
WIND." In raising this question, Arjuna is asking Krishna
for some practical tips by which he can gain perfect
control over the stormy nature of "the unyielding, strong,
turbulent and restless mind." Herein, unlike the previous
471
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
stanza, the Lord is addressed by His most familiar name
'Krishna'; a word that comes from the root Krisha --- " to
scrape." The term "Krishna" is applicable to the Self
because, on realisation
of the Truth, the threats of the delusory mind and the
consequent dreamy vasanas will all be scraped away from
our cognition.
The bloody hands of the dreamer get automatically
cleaned and all the moral stigma attached to the murder
immediately gets cleared, when the dreamer wakes up.
Similarly, the mind and its onslaughts, its vasanas and
their tyranny, the intellect and its quest, the physical body
and its appetites... all, all end with the rediscovery of the
true nature of the Self. Therefore the poet-philosopher
Vyasa, in his immortal classic, Mahabharata, paints the
inner Self as Lord "Krishna," the Flute-player of
Vrindavana. In Sanskrit, this is a special art, unknown to
any other language in the world: the coining of a proper
noun for a person to indicate the peculiar quality that is to
be suggested in the context of
the narration.
ACCEPTING THE ARGUMENTS OF ARJUNA, THE
LORD ANSWERS THAT THERE IS A METHOD BY
WHICH THE INVINCIBLE MIND CAN BE BROUGHT
UNDER CONTROL:
472
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Blessed Lord said: 35. Undoubtedly, O mighty-armed one,
the mind is difficult to control and is restless; but, by practice, O
Son of Kunti, and by dispassion, it is restrained.
Krishna knew his Arjuna; the warrior, the man of action,
the daring adventurer, the ruthless realist. When such a
tumultuous personality spurs himself on with a drawn
dagger, as it were, either to agree with or to condemn the
noble philosophy of a true missionary, the teacher must
have the balance of mind to approach the rebel-intellect
with divine understanding and extreme tact. At this
juncture in the Geeta, the situation, in a nutshell, is this:
the Lord propounds a theory that MIND STILLED IS SELF
GAINED, and Arjuna argues that mind cannot be stilled
and so Self cannot be gained.
When an impetuous man like Arjuna gets hold of an idea
in all enthusiasm, the best technique is to yield to him to
start with. "Stooping to conquer" is the secret of success in
philosophical discussions, especially in such cases of
prejudice natural to the ignorant. Thus, the great
psychologist Krishna, with the very first word in his reply,
quietly disarms his mighty adversary, and tickles his
vanity with the term, "NO DOUBT, O MIGHTY-ARMED."
Krishna admits that the mind is turbulent, strong,
unyielding and restless and that it is very difficult to
control, and therefore, the goal of perfect and enduring
tranquillity, cannot EASILY be achieved.
473
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
By this admission Arjuna is flattered. By reminding him
that he is a mighty-armed soldier in life, he is mentally
brought to a restful peace. The taunting implication in it is
obvious; to achieve the impossible and the difficult is the
job of the mighty-armed: it is no glory for a warrior to
claim that he has plucked half-a-dozen flowers from a
bush in his own court-yard. The mind is, no doubt, a great
enemy --- but, the greater the enemy, the nobler the
victory.
In the second line of this stanza, the eternal missionary in
Krishna, very carefully weighs his words and uses the
most appropriate terms to soothe the mind of Arjuna. "O
SON OF KUNTI, IT CAN BE BROUGHT UNDER
CONTROL" is an assertion which comes only at the very
end of the stanza. Through practice and renunciation, the
mind can be brought under control in the beginning, and
ultimately to a perfect 'halt' --- this is the confident,
reassuring declaration of the Lord in the Geeta.
Renunciation has been already described earlier in the
Geeta as Samnyasa which was defined as renunciation of
(a) all clinging attachments to the objects of the world, (b)
lingering expectations for the fruits-of-action. These two
are the main causes for the agitation of thoughts, which
again thicken the flood of the thought-flow, and make the
mind uncontrollable. As Shankara declares, 'practice'
(Abhyasa) is "constant repetition of an idea regarding one
and the same object-of-thought." This consistency of
thought during steady meditation generally gets
474
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dissipated because of the frequent explosive eruptions of
desires. Whipped up by the new desires that are rising at
every moment, the thoughts wander into dissimilar
channels of activities, upsetting the inner equilibrium, and
thereby shattering the true vitality of the inner
personality.
Thus viewed, practice (Abhyasa) strengthens renunciation
(Samnyasa), which generates detachment (Vairagya), and
which in its turn deepens meditation (Abhyasa). Hand in
hand, each strengthening the other, the total progress is
steadily maintained.
In scriptural text-books, the arrangement of words is to be
carefully noted, for, in all cases, the words are arranged in
a descending order of importance. To very seeker the
question comes at one time or the other, whether he
should wait for the spirit of detachment arriving in his
mind of its own accord, or he should start his practice. The
majority wait in vain for the accidental arrival of the
moment of Vairagya before they start their Abhyasa. The
Geeta, in this stanza, by putting the word 'practice'
(Abhyasa) before the word 'detachment' (Vairagya) clearly
declares that such an expectation is as ridiculous as
waiting for the harvest of the crops that we have never
sowed!
Let us analyse life, question its experiences, argue with
ourselves and note carefully how much we put into life
475
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and how much, as a return, we gain from life. When we
become aware of the deficit balance, each time, we, of
necessity, shall start enquiring how our life could be more
profitably re-organised, so that our coffers of joy and
happiness could be replenished to their brim. Soon, the
study of the Shastras will follow, which will give us a peep
into the wonders of moral life, the wisdom of ethical
values, the joys of self-control, the thrills of growth, and
the consequent suffocation of the ego-centric little-life.
From the moment we start trying to become aware of our
own lives, we are in the realm of 'practice' (Abhyasa). As a
result of this, the detachment that comes automatically to
us is the true and enduring 'detachment' (Vairagya). All
else is a sham show of stupid self-denial, which cramps a
human being and distorts and perverts his intelligence
into an ugliness riddled with hysterical ravings and
bleeding with psychological ulcers. Vairagya born out of
Abhyasa alone is the charter for free spiritual growth; of
your own accord, never renounce anything. Let your
attachment-with-things drop off, of its own accord, as a
result of your intellectual growth into the higher planes of
better understanding and truer estimation of things and
beings, happenings and behaviours, occurrences and
incidents in life. When through right 'practice' enduring
'detachment' has come into our inner lives, then, the mind
comes under our control, because it has no more any
world of pluralistic objects to roam into, and the only
world which it now knows is the world of equanimity and
sameness. (V-19; VI-32).
476
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT THEN WILL BE THE LOT OF THOSE WHO
HAVE NO SELF-CONTROL?
36 . YOGA, I think is hard to be attained by one of uncontrolled
self; but the self-controlled, striving, can obtain it by (proper)
means.
In the previous stanza extreme emphasis was placed on
practice. But what constitutes the spiritual practice
(Abhyasa) was not indicated, even indirectly, in that verse.
A scientific book that leaves missing links, either in its
arguments, or in its logic, is no text-book at all. In the
stanza under review, Krishna is giving a direct clue to
what He means by the term 'practice' (Abhyasa).
He declares that the uncontrolled, and therefore, the
totally dissipated person, cannot bring into the field of
religion the necessary amount of dynamic vigour and
vitality to sustain him till he reaches the peak of his Self-
rediscovery. It is therefore said: "Yoga IS HARD TO BE
ATTAINED BY ONE OF UNCONTROLLED SELF."
An individual who barters himself away to slave among
the sense-objects according to the mad dictates of his flesh
--- or he who dances to the death-tunes sung by his
sensuous mind --- or he who roams about endlessly to
fulfil the tyrannical demands of a drunken intellect ---
such a one has neither peace of mind nor the strength of
477
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sustained aspiration to goad him on towards the Temple-
of-Truth within himself.
As long as the sense-organs are not properly controlled,
'the agitations of the mind' cannot be pacified. An agitated
mind is no instrument, either for listening or for reflection
or for meditation --- and without these three, the 'veiling
power' cannot be rolled up. The agitations (Vikshepa) and
veiling (Avarana) are caused by 'activity' (Rajas) and
'inactivity' (Tamas), and we have already found that,
without controlling these two temperaments, the 'un-
activity' (Sattwa) cannot come to predominate in the
seeker.
It is natural, in a discussion, that you have to present your
own arguments against a team of opposite arguments so
that the discriminative intellect of the listener may, by
contrast, easily judge the acceptability and logic of your
view-point. Krishna uses here this commonplace
technique of every drawing-room, when He, in the second
line, explains as a contrast, how "THE SELF-
CONTROLLED, STRIVING HARD, BY RIGHT MEANS,
CAN OBTAIN IT." Self-control, achieved through the
process of total withdrawal of the sense-organs from their
respective objects, is the beginning of spiritual life... and
this is never possible until we learn to turn our minds to
the Higher Truth.
Even in ordinary life, when he wants to achieve
something solid, the man-of-the-world will have to live to
478
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
a large extent in self-denial. The life of a candidate during
election time, that of a student before examinations, or of
an actor or a dancer before his first performance... are all
examples wherein we find that the individuals deny
themselves all their idle preoccupations in their anxiety
for success in their respective fields. If, for material gains
and flimsy ephemeral glories, we have to deny ourselves,
how much more should we deny ourselves the joys of the
world outside in order to win the glories of the Eternal
and the Permanent, the Infinite and the Absolute Bliss of
the Self!
It is not that the seeker should deny himself all sense-
objects. This seems to be the general misunderstanding
among almost all seekers in India to-day. In the name of
religion or spiritual practice, many seekers, at least for
some years, live seemingly in self-denial and self-
punishment, shamelessly insulting themselves and
carelessly persecuting their own physical urges and even
biological needs. This sort of a devilish and suicidal self-
condemning tyranny of oneself, always ends in an
outburst of Satanic forces from within the very seeker.
Lest the student of the Geeta also should fall a prey to
such a misunderstood and misconceived spirituality,
Bhagawan indicates here, that the self-controlled seeker
can, "STRIVING RIGHTLY, OBTAIN IT." Not going to a
cinema and not visiting the playgrounds are not, in
themselves, assurances that the students will pass their
examinations. The time wasted in such merry-making
479
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
must be properly utilised in intelligent study, which alone
can vouchsafe for them a success in their examinations.
Here too, if a student appearing for an examination in
mathematics, were to read the whole night geography
text-books, he cannot hope for any glorious success; he
must STRIVE RIGHTLY in order to gain true success.
Similarly, when through self-control, a seeker has
conserved in himself energies which would otherwise
have got dissipated in the gutters of sensuality, he must
know how to direct those energies into the right channels,
whereby he can get himself detached from his
misconceived self-projections and ultimately realise for
himself his own Self-hood. That such an intelligent seeker
"CAN OBTAIN IT" is the optimistic philosophy of this
ever-smiling God of the Hindus, Lord Krishna.
With these two verses, Krishna exhaustively answers the
question raised by Arjuna, and what follows clearly
indicates that the Pandava Prince has been convinced by
the Lord's reply.
THE QUESTION YET REMAINS OF WHAT WOULD BE
THE LOT OF ONE, 'SELF-CONTROLLED, AND
STRIVING HARD THROUGH RIGHT MEANS; WHO
COULD NOT YET FULFIL AND REACH THE GOAL:
Arjuna said: 37. He who, though possessed of faith, is unable to
control himself, whose mind wanders away from YOGA, to
480
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
what end does he, having failed to attain perfection in YOGA
go, O Krishna?
In this and the following two verses Veda Vyasa makes
Arjuna raise a pertinent question, so that Krishna may get
yet another chance to bring the supremely optimistic
philosophy of Vedanta right in the footlights. None,
striving on the Path Divine, can ever be destroyed; and
whatever he accomplishes will be faithfully carried over,
as a legacy, by the individualised-self in its pursuit here
and in the hereafter. Each today is an added link in the
endless chain of the dead-and-gone yesterdays. The chain
continues growing, by adding to itself link after link, all
the yesterdays. Death is only one of the incidents in a
human existence and the tomorrow has no accidental, or
arbitrary beginning, but it is only a perfect continuation of
yesterday MODIFIED by the thoughts and actions of
today.
Carefully voicing his vague doubt, Arjuna asks as to what
will happen to one, who strives with deep faith (Shraddha),
but fails to accomplish complete self-control during his
life-time, or due to lack of sufficient self-control falls from
Yoga. The doubt is that such an individual may thereby
come to lose both the little joys of the sense-objects and the
Absolute Bliss in the hereafter. The Vedantins, even while
they condemn a mere life of sense-joys, do not for a
moment deny the fact that there ARE traces of joy in the
sense life also. According to them, daring thinkers that
they are, the joys of the sense-objects (Vishaya-ananda) are,
481
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
in their essence, nothing other than glimpses of the
Spiritual Bliss (Brahmananda). The secret import of the
question is that those who faithfully follow Krishna's
theory may come to lose both the chances of experiencing
the finite and the Infinite joy.
Such a seeker, striving all his life to live in self-control,
will be a conscious escapist --- avoiding all the finite joy-
temptations in the gross world here. But, if the uncertain
factor --- death --- were to creep in to clip the thread of his
life with the scissors of time, he would lose his chances of
gaining the Absolute Beatitude, which is the goal that
Krishna seems to point out in his Divine Song. Again,
suppose that a seeker, due to a lack of self-control, falls
from Yoga. To win in Yoga, no doubt, is a great victory, a
GAIN PAR-EXCELLENCE. But if, in the race, one were to
get knocked down by the stealthy club of sensuousness,
one would stand to lose both here and hereafter.
Naturally, Arjuna wants some guidance from Krishna as
to what will happen to such an individual.
In this verse also, we must note very carefully, that the
term Shraddha is not some maddening superstition which
encourages a blind faith. According to Shankara, Shraddha
is the right intellectual apprehension of the deeper import
and the fuller significance of what the teachers teach and
the scriptures declare. The inspired devotion that springs
up in a bosom, from among its solid intellectual
convictions, gained through a true appreciation, is the
482
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mighty power called faith "that can move mountains" and
"can bring the very heavens on the earth."
TO THROW MORE COLOUR ON TO THE PICTURE OF
THE SPIRITUALLY DESPERATE SEEKER, WHOM
ARJUNA HAS ATTEMPTED TO PAINT IN THE
PREVIOUS STANZA, THE FOLLOWING IS ADDED:
38. Fallen from both, does he not, O mighty-armed, perish like a
rent cloud, supportless and deluded in the path of
BRAHMAN?
A sincere wayfarer, faithfully treading the path of self-
control to rediscover the Self, may get lost, if death were
to rob him on his way, or for want of complete self-control
he were to fall from Yoga. The striking example with
which this idea is brought out by Arjuna, is one of the
most brilliant poetic strokes in the entire Geeta. This is
often quoted in literary circles, whenever an attempt is
made to evaluate Vyasa, the poet, in Sanskrit literature.
In summer, mushroom-shaped floating castles of clouds
arise from behind the mountains to peep into the valleys
below. At the touch of some strong current of wind the
mass takes to flight, leaving along its trail, small bits of
fleecy cloudlets. Those little ones, torn away from the
parental bulk, get knocked about and are at the mercy of
every puff of breeze. Such summer cloudlets, aimlessly
kicked about according to the whims and fancies of the
483
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
winds, can never fulfil the expectations of the farmers, or
the clamour of the thirsty. Unfulfilling themselves, they
get tossed hither and thither without any haven for
themselves. "LIKE THE RENT CLOUD," Arjuna asks,
"will not the aspiring self in the seeker be forced to roam
about and ultimately get lost in the vast amphitheatre of
the Universe?"
WHY DOES ARJUNA ASK THIS QUESTION?
39. This doubt of mine, O Krishna, please dispel completely;
because it is not possible for any one but You to dispel this
doubt.
In this concluding verse of this section, Arjuna frankly
asks: "THIS DOUBT OF MINE, O KRISHNA, YOU
SHOULD COMPLETELY DISPEL."
"The Eternal Scraper," Lord Krishna, alone has the Pure
Wisdom that can rub out this doubt and quieten the
agitations caused by it, in the bosom of Arjuna. With this
question, it becomes amply clear that his previous doubt
has been totally dispelled. The earlier doubt was that:
"Self-Realisation is impossible, since the mind which is
ever turbulent can never be stilled." The reply of the Lord
had smoothened out this knotty kink in Arjuna's mind.
Every true seeker, if he be diligent enough, must come to
discover a couple of new doubts, when a previously
484
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
existing doubt has been cleared. The process of slowly
eliminating all these doubts, is the process of Vichara that
is practised both consciously and unconsciously, during
all Satsangas.
THE GLORIOUS LIFE OF THE HEREAFTER ASSURED
TO EVERY EVOLVER IS CLASSIFIED HEREUNDER, ON
THE BASIS OF THE INTENSITY OF THE MENTAL
ATTITUDE AND THE SPIRITUAL APTITUDE IN EACH
OF THEM.
IN THE FOLLOWING FIVE STANZAS, BHAGAWAN
TRIES TO EXPLAIN THE PATH OF PROGRESS OF A
SEEKER WHOSE SPIRITUAL ENDEAVOURS HAVE
BEEN EITHER CLIPPED BY AN UNTIMELY DEATH, OR
ARRESTED BY THE INTERVENTION OF SOME
SENSUOUS TEMPTATION.
The Blessed Lord said: 40. O Partha, neither in this world, nor
in the next world is there destruction for him; none, verily, who
strives to be good, O My son, ever comes to grief.
At the very opening of this section, Krishna assures, with
all emphasis at his command, that "NEITHER HERE NOR
IN THE HEREAFTER, IS THERE ANY DESTRUCTION
FOR HIM, WHO PERFORMS RIGHT ACTION."
485
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This statement is not a mere emotional assurance built
upon some blind faith, or a Godly declaration that is to be
swallowed down by the faithful, because of its being
sacred words that have come out of the lips of a Prophet.
The Hindus do not accept any divine prerogative, even for
their gods, by which they can by-pass the individual
intellect and the rules of logic. Religion is a "SCIENCE OF
LIFE" and it must completely explain the WHY and the
WHEREFORE of its practices.
Obedient to this incomparable trait in our culture, Krishna
supports his statement with the philosophical truth:
"NEVER FOR THE DOER OF GOOD, DEAR SON, A
WOEFUL END." One who acts rightly in the present, can
come to no grief in the future, because the future is but a
product of the past and the present.
The fear of Arjuna that the unsuccessful Yogin --- a seeker
obstructed and held up on the path --- will get lost "AS A
RENT CLOUD," here and in the hereafter, has risen from
his failure to appreciate the logical continuity and the
perfect sequence that is ever found in life. To consider that
death is the end of an existence which started with the
accident of birth, is a philosophy too rudimentary to be
considered complete and exhaustive. In fact, it is only
with a stretch of imagination that we can consider such a
theory as a philosophy.
Daring intellects, bravely pushing ahead in the quest to
understand and comprehend the laws of life and the
486
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
meaning and purpose of the Universe, cannot but accept
that the existence of an individual in its present
embodiment is but a single pearl in the necklace of Infinite
Beauty adorning the bosom of Truth. The present is the
product of the past, and thought by thought, action by
action, knowledge by knowledge, we are creating for
ourselves in the present the blue-print of our future.
Therefore, the Hindus believe in previous lives as well as
in future births for all embodied souls; this is otherwise
called the theory of re-incarnation.
Based upon this principle, Krishna insists that no seeker is
ever lost, although he may slip and fall, or even end his
present manifestation; tomorrow is but today modified,
but directly continued.
In addressing Arjuna as "O MY SON," Krishna has here
not only followed the traditional practice of the
Upanishads, but there is also a deeper significance.
However deceitful, cunning and cruel a brute one might
be to everyone else in the world, one cannot ever come to
advise a false philosophy to his own son. With fatherly
love, the Man-of-Wisdom in Krishna is assuring Arjuna
that one who is striving in the direction of evolution shall
never come to suffer any REAL fall. On the ladder of
cultural growth, each step that is placed forward is an
ascent towards the Absolute Perfection.
WHAT EXACTLY WOULD BE THE DESTINY OF A
MAN WHO COULD NOT COMPLETE HIS
487
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
PILGRIMAGE IN YOGA? WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM
THEN?
41 Having attained to the worlds of the righteous, and having
dwelt there for everlasting (long) years, he who had fallen from
YOGA is born again in the house of the pure and the wealthy.
The hereafter is ordered by the actions performed and the
motives entertained here. Actions in life can be mainly
classified as good and evil; and the pursuers of the evil
can only slip down the path of evolution. Those who are
doing good work alone can start their climb on to the
higher points on the tower of their spiritual progress.
Even here, our text-books make a careful distinction and
classify all good activities under two main headings: (a)
actions performed with desires, and (b) those that are
performed in a spirit of dedicated love and in a sense of
divine worship. Since reactions to actions depend entirely
upon the motives that propel those actions, the results
accruing from selfish and selfless activities must
necessarily differ from one another. Naturally, there must
be different routes of progress to the same Pinnacle of
Perfection. All of them are being indicated here in this
section.
Those who are employing themselves in the worship of
the Lord with desire for heavenly enjoyments will, after
their death, reach those planes-of-consciousness which are
conducive for exhausting all such desires and, having
488
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
exhausted these desires therein, they will take their birth
again, here in the world, "IN THE HOUSES OF THE
PURE AND THE PROSPEROUS." In short, all burning
desires of every human will be fulfilled at one time or
another, if the desires are strong enough and are
accompanied by intense activities appropriate for their
fulfilment.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS TO THOSE WHO ARE
PURSUING THE GOOD, IN A SPIRIT OF SELF-LESS
DEDICATION?
42. Or, he is even born in the family of the wise YOGIS; verily,
a birth like this is very difficult to obtain in this world.
The other type, which makes a direct and immediate
manifestation, in which the continuity of the past is clearly
noticeable, is the theme of this stanza. Those who are
pursuing selfless Upasanas, thereby gain more and more
inner integration and as a result of it, they become
dynamic minds capable of the highest meditation. The
more integrated a personality, the more spiritual he
becomes, and therefore, he must be given a chance to fulfil
himself, not in heaven, which is a plane for enjoyment, but
he must arrive right here to strive more diligently and
achieve the highest. Such an ego-centre (Jeeva), as soon as
it leaves one embodiment immediately comes to manifest
itself in a conducive atmosphere, where it can continue its
pilgrimage without any obstruction. It being an aspiring
489
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
heart, it should necessarily come to be "BORN ONLY IN A
FAMILY OF WISE-MEN-OF-MEDITATION."
This theory gives a lot of insight into the present-day
fallacy which gives such an exaggerated importance to
one's unhealthy environments and makes everyone
protest against one's surroundings. No doubt, in some
ways man is a creature of his environments; but the same
statement, when viewed through the glasses of
philosophy, gives also an insight into the fact that the
individuals, in their own freedom, had themselves
ordered in the past their own present environments. By
merely changing his environments, the individual
concerned cannot progress; a habitual drunkard may still
continue drinking on the sly, even if he were to be brought
into a dry city to live among teetotallers.
Examples like Shankara, Christ, Buddha, and other great
masters can be considered as supporting this
philosophical theory. Such men of brilliant genius, who,
from their very early youth, exhibit superhuman
knowledge and Godly wisdom, are no doubt, rare.
Krishna himself accepts here that such persons are "VERY
RARE TO OBTAIN IN THIS WORLD." If the previous
stanza explained the re-birth of an ego (Jeeva) after an
interval of existence in the heavens, this stanza explains
the lives of the few, who, after departing from one
embodiment, immediately arrive in this world to continue
their pilgrimage to Perfection.
490
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
AFTER REACHING SUCH CONDUCIVE AND
HELPFUL ENVIRONMENTS, WILL THE FALLEN YOGI
OF THE LAST LIFE CONTINUE HIS SPIRITUAL LIFE?
LISTEN:
43. There he comes to be united with the knowledge acquired in
his former body and strives more than before for Perfection, O
son of the Kurus.
It may be feared, that an individual who is thus born
again, will have to start his studies and practices all over
again. To remove any such doubt, Krishna explains here
that such an individual, in his new life, under the
conducive circumstances, gets naturally "UNITED WITH
THE INTELLIGENCE ACQUIRED IN HIS FORMER
BODY." Such a born-Yogi completes his education much
more easily than others, since, to him, it is not an
education that is needed, but only a revision, or a
recapitulation. In a very short time, he discovers that all
knowledge is bubbling up from within himself, and to
him study is but a rediscovery of a digested knowledge
which was already lying dormant in him.
Not only does he discover in himself the knowledge that
he had acquired in the past, but he easily finds in himself
the required enthusiasm and energy for a consistent self-
application and vigorous pursuit. Knowledge without
practice is a dull, dreary load upon the shoulders of a
seeker. Krishna asserts here that one "fallen from Yoga" in
491
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the past, when he is reborn in the right atmosphere, not
only regains all knowledge easily, but he comes to
"STRIVE MORE THAN BEFORE, FOR PERFECTION, O
SON OF THE KURUS."
HOW CAN ONE GET UNITED WITH THE
INTELLIGENCE ACQUIRED IN HIS FORMER
EMBODIMENT? LISTEN:
44. By that very former practice he is borne on inspite of himself.
Even he who merely wishes to know YOGA goes beyond the
SHABDA BRAHMAN.
At any given moment our bank balance is the balance to
our credit shown in our 'statement of account.' No banker
can give us more, nor can he cheat us with a smaller
amount. Almost in the same fashion, in the cultural
growth of a given mind and intellect, no god can either
take away any or give some more, but can only hand over
to each one of us his own exact "balance." Each birth has a
logical continuity with its own past, as strictly as we
experience in day-to-day life. Today is but an extension of
yesterday. With the full understanding of this law of life
in our mind, if we are to re-read the stanza, its suggestions
become quite clear automatically, without any strain.
An individual who has been in Yoga in his past life, will
be, "BY THAT VERY FORMER PRACTICE, BORNE ON
IN SPITE OF HIMSELF." This is true even in our life here.
492
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
An educated man will, IN SPITE OF HIMSELF, be carried
away in his behaviour and conversation to exhibit his
cultivated mental and disciplined physical habits. No
cultured man can successfully imitate the idiot for a long
time; so too, no rascal can act the part of the noble-born for
any length of time. Both will, sooner or later, be
compelled, IN SPITE OF THEMSELVES, to exhibit
unconsciously their true nature through their words,
ideas, and actions.
Similarly, a man who had in the past lived the life of self-
control, study, and practice gathers unto himself those
cultural traits and he, in this life, IN SPITE OF HIMSELF
and in spite of all his adverse circumstances,
environments and conditions of life, cannot but
instinctively come to exhibit --- in his attitudes to life, and
in his behaviour towards the things and beings in the
world --- a tranquillity and a balance, which are a surprise
even to himself.
This is no mere theory. The truth of the statement is amply
evident everywhere in any society, in all strata of its life,
in all its professions and in all departments of its activities.
Each one of us has an instinctive bent of mind, and we are
irresistibly drawn towards it, IN SPITE OF OURSELVES.
This pull is most powerful when arising from our essential
evolutionary tendencies. Even a bandit chieftain can,
overnight, turn himself to be a determined seeker and, ere
long, become a great poet of the land, as Valmiki did in
the past. Hundreds of such examples could be noted from
493
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
our recent history and even amidst us today. In all those
cases, the only satisfactory explanation will be that the
individual mind-and-intellect was expressing through its
given physical structure its own characteristic tendencies,
which it had acquired by itself in its past incarnations,
through its own willful actions and deliberate motives.
When an individual, who was a fallen Yogi in the past, is
reborn, "IN SPITE OF HIMSELF" he is drawn towards a
life of meditation and quietude, of seeking and striving, of
self-control and discipline. Let him be put on the throne of
a kingdom, or in the bustle of a market-place, or in the
ignominy of the gutters, he cannot but express his nobility
of heart and the philosophical bent of his mind. All the
wealth in the world brought under command,
unquestioned might and power gained, love and respect
given... yet he cannot be dissuaded from his Path Divine.
If the whole world stands surprised at his peculiar
tendencies, he himself is one of those who are gazing on
with the wildest surprise, with the utmost amazement!!
"BY THAT PREVIOUS PRACTICE ALONE IS HE BORNE
ON IN SPITE OF HIMSELF."
After observing this philosophical truth, Lord Krishna is
naturally tempted to express the glory of meditation
(Yoga). He says "ONE WHO HAS EVEN THE WISH TO
KNOW CONTROL (YOGA), HE PASSES BEYOND THE
VEDIC RITUAL." According to Shankara, the term
"Shabda-brahman" used here denotes "the words in the
Veda," wherein the term Veda indicates only the "ritualistic
494
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
portion." Therefore, the Acharya, commenting upon this
portion, says that such an individual goes beyond all the
charms for the promised fruits of the Vedic rituals. This
may rightly be considered as too laboured a commentary,
although its implications are only too true. One who has
warped his mind in the practice of self-control, study, and
meditation in the past, could not have any more
fascination for the material wealth or the sensuous life,
however celestial they might be. Even if this interpretation
fits in with the context, we must admit that it has been
laboriously stretched by the teacher of the Advaita-
philosophy.
HOW IS THE PATH OF MEDITATION NOBLER THAN
ALL OTHERS? LISTEN:
45. But the YOGI, who strives with assiduity, purified from
sins and perfected (gradually) through many births, then attains
the highest Goal.
As already noticed, the mind-intellect equipment of an
individual functions through his body in the world
outside as per the traits chalked out upon it by the actions
performed in its earlier lives. These channels of thinking
cut across the fields of the mind determine the direction of
its thoughts and the texture of its actions in the present.
These lacerations on the subtle body are called in Vedanta
as 'SINS,' or as the 'DIRT OF THE WITHIN.' These
495
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
impurities are removed and the existing ulcers healed
through selfless action.
But even while rejecting the wrong negative tendencies of
the mind, the individual will have to plough the fields of
his mind with new patterns representing the constructive
divine tendencies. These meritorious vasanas (punya) can
also provide a severe obstruction for a man of meditation.
After having purified his mind of its unethical and
sensuous tendencies, the aspirant should practise
meditation. During the still moments of peace in the depth
of his depths, when he exposes his mind to the thrilled
atmosphere of its vibrant silence, the noble traits also get
completely wiped off. A state of mind which is thus
rendered completely impressionless (vasana-less) is the
end of the mind, since mind is nothing but a bundle of
vasanas. Where the mind has ended, there the ego has also
ended having "THEN REACHED THE HIGHEST GOAL,
or gained Self-rediscovery.
The explanation of this theory would not perhaps occupy
more than half a page, but in actually carving it our into
our individual life, it may be a programme for very many
lives' consistent practice. "Through many births" is a
phrase used in the Upanishads by the honest "Scientists of
Life," the Rishis, and they are perfectly right; for evolution,
as we all know, is not a drama played out during an
afternoon, but it is the slow revelation of the history of
progress through endless aeons.
496
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
To one who has the proper temperament to seek Life, the
anxiety to realise the Perfection, the capacity to
understand the hollowness of sense-life, the daring to
follow the narrow foot-prints of the Seers of the world, the
appetite for Infinite peace and tranquillity, the courage to
live the moral and the ethical values, the heroism to barter
one's all to achieve the highest... such a one is not a
"mineral-man," nor a "vegetable-specimen," nor an
"animal-man," but he is the noblest creation under the
Sun, a perfect "man-man," standing right in front of the
Doors of Truth, demanding as a "God-man" his admission
into the SANCTUM SANCTORUM!
Right now, this very life IS OUR LAST BIRTH, if we have
a taste to meditate, an urge to seek, a daring to live the
Life Divine!
There is nothing which may sound original in this
interpretation to all diligent students of the Geeta. A
sacred text-book that has been roaring, time and again, in
an irrepressible spirit of optimism, the message of hope
and cheer, with no threats of hell and brimstone anywhere
in it, cannot be considered to have changed its music all of
a sudden, to declare that man has hopes of salvation only
after "many births" and not "here and now." Even though
this misinterpretation may perhaps be helpful to the
saboteurs of our religion, no intelligent student of the
Geeta can, even for a moment, be hoodwinked by such
false notes.
497
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THEREFORE:
46. The YOGI is thought to be superior to the ascetics, and even
superior to men-of-knowledge (mere scholars) ; he is also
superior to men-of-action; therefore (you strive to) be a YOGI,
O Arjuna.
In order to bring out the importance of meditation among
the various practices in the Science of Spiritual
development, Lord Krishna is providing here a tabulated
list of the various types of seekers, indicating the greatest
of the whole lot. Compared with those who practise
thoughtless and dull-witted physical self-denial
(Tapaswins), the meditator is certainly nobler.
Nobler than those who vigorously read the scriptures and
try to learn and remember their declarations (Jnanis), is the
Yogi (Meditator).
There are others who strive towards the same Bright Peak
of Perfection, treading along the path of selfless work
(Karmis), undertaken in the world outside in a spirit of
Yajna, (IV-24 to 30.) and who perform worship (Upasana)
in a spirit of divine dedication. These ritualists, both in the
secular and in the sacred fields of activities, believe that
they can reach the Infinite Bliss through these very
activities.
498
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna concludes here that a silent and quiet meditator,
who struggles hard to withdraw himself from his own
false identifications with his body, mind and intellect,
through constant and consistent contemplation upon the
nature of the Self, is ever the best.
Thus, comparing a meditator with: (a) a man of utter self-
denial, (b) deep students of the scriptures, and (c)
ritualists, Krishna concludes his observations that a
meditator alone is the best among the whole lot, standing
nearest to Truth and "THEREFORE, YOU BE A YOGI
(MEDITATOR), O ARJUNA."
THERE ARE DIFFERENT TYPES OF MEDITATORS,
EACH MEDITATING UPON A DIFFERENT POINT OF
CONTEMPLATION. WHO AMONG THEM IS THEN
THE BEST AND THE GREATEST MEDITATOR? LISTEN:
47. And among all YOGIS, he who, full of faith, with his inner-
self merged in Me, worships Me, is, according to Me, the most
devout.
Whereas the previous stanza gives us a relative estimate
of the different paths in spirituality, and finally declares
that meditation is the best among the lot, the stanza now
under review explains who exactly is the best among all
the meditators. Meditation is, in the beginning at least, a
deliberate act by which the seeker strives to keep his
thoughts channelised into one pre-determined divine line
499
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of thinking; and this is maintained by disallowing the
mind to run into dissimilar thought-channels. Meditation,
therefore, must of necessity start with an effort on the part
of the meditator to fix his mind upon some object of
contemplation. The Art of Meditation can be classified
under different types, according to the nature of the object
of contemplation chosen and according to the nature of
the persuasions adopted in curtailing the mind from its
mad roamings.
Thus we have, in the tradition of our practices,
meditations prescribed upon a symbol, on the God-
principle with a form, on the teacher, on the Kundalini, on
any of the great elements, or on a chosen scriptural text.
Accordingly, the practitioners may be considered as
followers of different kinds of meditation. The Singer of
the Geeta is trying to indicate here, who exactly is to be
considered as the best and the most successful meditator
among the types mentioned above.
In this concluding stanza of the chapter, the Lord insists
that of all the meditators, he who "WITH HIS INNER-
SELF (MIND-AND-INTELLECT) MERGED IN THE SELF,
AND WITH 'SHRADDHA' DEVOTES HIMSELF TO THE
SELF, IS THE MOST FIRM AND STEADFAST
MEDITATOR." The pregnant suggestions contained in
this stanza can fill volumes, inasmuch as it is a summary
of the entire Yoga Shastra. Naturally therefore, Lord
Krishna dedicates the entire length of the next chapter as
an annotation to this mantra-like stanza.
500
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
For the purpose of our understanding this chapter, it is
sufficient for the time-being if we gather from this stanza
that the essence of meditation is not so much in our
attempt at integrating the mind as in the ultimate merging
of the inner equipment (Antahkarana), and getting it
completely sublimated in the final experience of the Self.
That, this can be done only by one who does proper
Bhajana upon the Self with all Shraddha, is the truth-
declaration made here with a loving insistence by the
Eternal Lover of the gopis.
The term Bhajana has come to gather to itself such a lot of
adventitious superstitions that, as it is understood today,
it means elaborate rituals, which, almost always, mean
nothing to the priest, nor to the devotees who are mere
onlookers of the priestly performances. Sometimes it
means a lot of loud singing with noisy accompaniments,
and an entire crowd roaring away on their march towards
an emotional ecstasy, and often, each session ending in
hysteria and exhaustion. Very rarely do they gain even a
vague experience of the spiritual thrill. In the Vedantic
text-books, Bhajana is "the attempt of the ego to pour itself
out" in an act of devoted dedication towards the Principle
of Reality, whereby the devoted personality successfully
invokes the experience that lies beyond the noisy shores of
the mind-intellect equipment. One who does this
invocation (Bhajana) of the Self, and naturally gets himself
merged in that awakening, is declared here by the teacher
of the Geeta, as belonging to the highest type of
meditation.
501
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
It is quite evident to every student of Vedanta that such a
meditator comes to transcend all his identifications with
the false matter-envelopments, and becomes, through the
experience of his Real Nature, the very Self. Yet, the
mouth-piece of renascent Hinduism, Lord Krishna, in his
modesty and reverence for the tradition in our culture,
attributes this statement in the stanza to his own personal
opinion.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta, in the Science
of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the dialogue between Sri
Krishna and Arjuna, the sixth discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF
MEDITATION
Nowhere else in the entire extent of the voluminous
spiritual literature that we have in the Upanishads, the
Brahmasutra and the Geeta (Prasthana Traya), can we find
such a wealth of details, explaining not only the technique
of meditation but also the possible pitfalls and how to
avoid them successfully, as we have them so clearly and
vividly explained here. No scripture fails to hint at the
Path of Meditation, as the way to reach the highest
possibilities in life, and yet, nowhere have we, among our
reported and compiled heritage of sacred books, such a
vivid discussion of the entire path. To a true seeker,
indeed, a thorough study of the Sixth Chapter is ample
direction and guidance to reach the highest through
Meditation. It is therefore but proper that this chapter is
put under the title: "The Yoga of Meditation."
Om Om Om Om Om
502
