Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
unavoidable before the actual Yoga is started, even the
initial mental condition is called, by a wishful anticipation,
as Yoga. For learning and living the Geeta, the Arjuna-
condition is the initial Sadhana.
Om Om Om Om Om
Chapter 2
Sankhya Yoga
The Yoga of Knowledge
Sanjaya said: 1. To him who was thus overcome with pity and
despondency, with eyes full of tears and agitated, Madhusudana
spoke these words.
The second chapter opens with an announcement from
Sanjaya which, with a few rightly chosen words, gives a
complete picture of Arjuna's sad mental state of
desperation. His mind had become overwhelmed with
pity and sorrow. The very expression clearly indicates that
Arjuna was not the master of the situation at that time, but
on the contrary, the situation had Arjuna as its victim! To
get ourselves over-ridden by life's circumstances is to
50
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ensure disastrous failures on all occasions. Only a
weakling, who allows himself to be overpowered by
circumstances, can be victimised by the outer happenings.
Arjuna, in his present neurotic condition, has become a
slave to the outer challenges.
The estimate of Sanjaya not only describes to us the
mental condition of Arjuna but also pointedly gives us a
hint that the cracking of the inner personality of Arjuna
has made deep fissures into the character of the great
hero. The greatest archer of his time, Arjuna, has been so
totally impoverished within that he has come to weep like
a simple maiden!
To Arjuna, thus overwhelmed by an emotion of misplaced
pity and tearless weeping, Madhusudana (slayer of the
demon, Madhu), Lord Krishna, spoke the following
words. Here, it is to be noted that modern psychology has
also observed and recorded that a tearless weeping is the
climax in the attack of hysteria.
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Whence is this perilous condition come
upon thee, this dejection, un-Aryan-like, heaven-excluding,
disgraceful, O Arjuna?
The Lord of the Hindus is surprised to see that a king,
claiming to be an Aryan, is feeling so flabbergasted on the
battlefield. The instinct of a true Aryan is to be balanced
and equipoised in all conditions of life and to face
situations diligently, compelling them to change their
51
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
threatening attitude and make them favourable to himself.
When life is courted properly, even the ugliest situation
can be transformed into a charming smile of success.
Everything depends upon the intelligent man's dexterity
in steering himself upon the bumping roads of life. Thus,
Lord Krishna characterises Arjuna's behaviour as un-
Aryan. The Aryans are extremely sensitive to the higher
calls of life, righteousness and nobility, both in thought
and action.
The Divine Charioteer is quite surprised at discovering
such an attitude in his friend, whom he had known for
years through thick and thin. The mood of dejection was,
in fact, quite alien to the mental make-up and intellectual
nature of Arjuna. Thus, we have here an expression of
wonder and the Lord asks, "Whence comes upon thee this
dejection, etc..."
It is believed by the Hindus that to die fighting for
righteousness is the duty of one born in a family of kings
and by so sacrificing his life on the battle-field for a noble
cause, he reaches and enjoys the Heaven of the Heroes
(Veera-Swarga).
3. Yield not to impotence, O Partha! It does not befit thee, Cast
off this mean weakness of heart! Stand up, O Parantapa (O
scorcher of foes) !
In stinging reproachful words, Krishna is deliberately
lashing at the anxiety-state-neurotic in Arjuna. Krishna,
52
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
who was so far silent, is now bursting forth into an
eloquence, in which every word is a chosen missile, a
pounding hammer-stroke that can flatten any victim.
The word 'Klaibyam' means, the mental attitude of one
who is neither masculine enough to feel a passionate
courage and daring, nor womanly enough to feel the soft
emotions of hesitation and despair. In modern parlance,
sometimes friends wonder at the impotency of another
friend and express their surprise with such an exclamation
as, "Is he a man or a woman?" --- meaning that from his
behaviour it is not very easy to decide which characteristic
is predominant in him. Emotionally, therefore, Arjuna is
behaving now as a contradiction; effeminately-manly and
masculinely-effeminate, just as a eunuch of the Indian
royal courts --- looks like a man but dresses as a woman,
talks like a man but feels like a woman, physically strong
but mentally weak!
So far Krishna was silent and the silence had a deep
meaning. Arjuna, overwhelmed with compassion, had
taken the decision not to fight and was all along mustering
arguments in support of it. As a diplomat, Krishna knew
that it would have been useless to contradict his friend
earlier when he was inspired to argue eloquently in
support of his own wrong estimate of things. But the tears
in the eyes of Arjuna indicated that his inward confusion
had reached a climax.
53
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In the tradition of religious devotion, it is very truly said
and firmly believed all over the world, that the Lord, in
His high seat, keeps mum and is almost deaf so long as we
are arguing and asserting our maturity as intellectual
beings. But when we come down to live and act as
emotional beings, when tears of desperation trickle down
the cheeks of true devotees, then, unasked, the LORD OF
COMPASSION rushes forward to reach the lost souls and
guides them out of their inward darkness to the
resplendent LIGHT OF WISDOM. A soul, identifying with
the intellect, can seek and discover itself; but, when it is
identifying with the mind, it needs the help and guidance
of the Lord.
The touch of the Lord's grace, when it descends upon His
devotees, is invariably felt by the seekers more as an
avalanche than as a refreshing shower of Divine Mercy.
Spiritual Grace must necessarily re-orientate the heart and
burn away its negativities before the Spirit can radiate its
sway upon matter. True to this great principle observed
everywhere and experienced by every true seeker, in the
Geeta too, we find that, when the silent Lord, from the
Charioteer's seat, started speaking, His words gleamed
and landed like lightning on Arjuna to burn his wrong
mental tendencies in the fire of shame.
Soft words of sympathy could not have revived Arjuna's
drooping mind to vigour. Thus Krishna rightly lashed his
friend with these stinging arrows of ridicule, dipped in the
54
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
acid of satire!! Krishna ends his "word-treatment" with an
appeal to Arjuna to "Get up and act."
Arjuna said: 4. How, O Madhusudana, shall I, in battle, fight
with arrows against Bhishma and Drona, who are fit to be
worshipped, O destroyer of enemies!
The motive-hunting cowardice in Arjuna has come to pick
up a great argument, seemingly quite convincing to the
undiscriminating. On the other hand, to one who has not
lost his balance and who knows perfectly the art of
evaluating such a situation, this is no problem at all, and
Arjuna's arguments are quite hollow. The war that is
imminent is not between individuals due to any personal
rivalry. Arjuna has no personality apart from the
Pandava-forces, and the pair, Drona and Bhishma, are also
not mere individual entities; in their identification, they
are the Kaurava-forces. The two forces are arrayed to fight
for certain principles. The Kauravas are fighting for their
policy-of-Adharma. The Pandavas are fighting for the
principles-of-Dharma as enunciated in the ancient lore of
the Hindus.
So glorious being the cause, when the two armies
representing the will of the People have marshalled
themselves, Arjuna, the hero, had no individual right to
accept any personal honour or dishonour, or to insist on
any respect or disrespect, in meeting the individuals who
were champions of the wrong side. Without taking this
total view-point of the situation, Arjuna made the mistake
55
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of arrogating to himself an individual ego and observed
the problems through the glasses of his ego. He
recognised himself to be the disciple of Drona and the
grandson of Bhishma. The very same teacher and
grandsire were also seeing Arjuna in the opposite camp,
but they felt no compunction, because they had no such
egoistic misconceptions. They drowned their individuality
in the cause they were championing. In short, Arjuna's
egoism was the cause for his terrible moral confusions and
misconceptions.
I have often discussed this portion with some of the best
men of our country and I have found all of them justifying
Arjuna's argument. That is to say, this is a very subtle
point to be decided and, perhaps, Vyasa thought of
solving this riddle for the society with the very principles
of Hinduism for the guidance of future generations. The
more we identify ourselves with the little 'I' in us, the
more will be our problems and confusions in life. When
we expand ourselves through our larger identifications ---
with an army, a cause or a principle, or a nation or an age
--- we shall find our moral confusions dwindling into
almost nothingness. Perfect morality can be declared and
lived only by him who has sought to live and discover his
real identity with the Self which is ONE WITHOUT A
SECOND, EVERYWHERE, IN ALL BEINGS AND
FORMS. Later on, we shall find Krishna advising this
TRUTH as a philosophical treatment for Arjuna's mental
rehabilitation.
56
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
5. Better indeed, in this world, is to eat even the bread of
'beggary' than to slay the most noble of teachers. But, if I kill
them, even in this world, all my enjoyments of wealth and
desires will be stained with blood.
Continuing his high sounding but futile arguments, due to
his false estimate of himself and his problem, Arjuna
poses here as a martyr of his own morality and ethical
goodness.
His gurus, meaning both Drona and Bhishma, are
characterised here as Mahanubhavah --- men who were the
ideals of their age, symbolising the best in our culture,
who, in their broad-mindedness and courage of
conviction, had themselves offered many a sacrifice at the
altars of the Sanatana Dharma, the Hindu science of perfect
living. Such noble men, who formed the very touch-stones
of our culture in that era, were not to be eliminated from
life, merely for the fulfilment of an individual's appetite
for power and position. Not only in their own age, but for
millenarian, the world would be impoverished by the
heartless squandering of such precious lives.
Thus, Arjuna says that it would be nobler for himself and
the Pandava-brothers to live upon the bread of beggary
than to gain kingship after destroying all the glorious
flowers in the garden of our culture. After annihilating
them all, elders and teachers, even supposing the
Pandavas actually got their kingdom back, Arjuna points
out how his noble Aryan-heart would not be able to enjoy
57
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
either the kingdom or its wealth; for everything would be
smeared by the bitter memories of the precious blood that
would have been spilt in the war.
Once we misread a situation, sentiments cloud our
understanding and then we too act in life as Arjuna did in
his. This is clearly indicated here in the detailed narration
of the incident by Vyasa.
6. I can scarcely say which will be better, that we should
conquer them or that they should conquer us. Even the sons of
Dhritarashtra, after slaying whom we do not wish to live, stand
facing us.
The two earlier stanzas from Arjuna, no doubt, indicate to
us the state of perplexity and confusion in his 'objective-
mind.' That the state of hysteria within has now
developed to attack even his intellectual composure is
indicated in this stanza. The stimuli coming from the array
of the enemy-lines, as they touched his 'objective-mind,'
created therein a problem, to solve which, he needed the
guidance of the rational capacities of his intellect --- the
'subjective-mind.' Split as he was within, his mental
personality, divorced from his intellect, could not easily
come to any definite decision. His egoistic self-evaluation
and the ego-created intense anxieties for the fruits of the
great war, stood, as it were, between his mind and
intellect, separating them and creating between them, an
almost unbridgeable gulf; hence, Arjuna's confusions here.
58
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The mind, generally functioning as an efficient "receiving-
and-despastching-clerk," receives the information of the
perceptions conveyed to it by the sense-organs, and after
arranging these perceptions in order, conveys them to the
intellect for its judgement. The intellect, with reference to
its own stored-up memories of similar experiences in the
past, comes to final decisions which are conveyed to the
mind for execution; and the mind in its turn issues the
necessary orders for the organs-of-action to act upon. All
these are happening at every moment, all through our
waking-state, in our intelligent existence in the midst of
the objects of the world.
Where these equipments are not functioning co-
operatively, with perfect team spirit, the personality of the
individual is shattered and he becomes inefficient in
meeting life as a victorious mortal. The rehabilitation of
that individual is the re-adjustment and re-education of
his inner world and where his personality is once again
tuned up and adjusted, he comes to exhibit better
efficiency in life.
Poor Arjuna, victimised not so much by the external
world as by his own mental condition, is seen here as
being incapable of judging whether he should conquer his
enemy or, by an ignoble retreat, allow them to conquer
him. In this stanza, Vyasa is indicating to us that the
hysteria in Arjuna was not only mental, but also at the
level of the intellect.
59
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
7. My heart is overpowered by the taint of pity; my mind is
confused as to duty. I ask Thee. Tell me decisively what is good
for me. I am Thy disciple. Instruct me, who have taken refuge in
Thee.
In this stanza, when Arjuna has completely realised the
helpless impotency in himself to come to any decision, he
surrenders totally to Krishna. He, in his own words,
admits the psychological shattering felt and lived by him
in his bosom. He has instinctively diagnosed, correctly,
even the cause of it to be "an uncontrollable amount of
over-whelming pity." Of course, Arjuna does not realise
that it is his misplaced compassion; but, whatever it be,
the patient is now under the mental stress of extreme
confusion and bewilderment.
Arjuna confesses that his intellect (Chetas) has gone behind
a cloud of confusions regarding what Dharma and
Adharma are at that moment for him. The problem ---
whether to fight and conquer the enemies or not to fight
and allow the enemies to conquer him --- which needed an
urgent solution, could not be rationally judged with the
depleted mental capacities of Arjuna.
We have already explained Dharma and found that the
Dharma of a thing 'is the law of its being.' A thing cannot
remain itself without faithfully maintaining its own
nature, and 'THAT NATURE, WHICH MAKES A THING
WHAT IT IS' is called Dharma. Hinduism insists on the
Manava Dharma, meaning, it insists that men should be
60
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
true to their own essential nature, which is godly and
divine, and, therefore, all efforts in life should be directed
towards maintaining themselves in the dignity of the Soul
and not plod on through life like helpless animals.
Here Arjuna indicates that he is quite ready to follow all
the instructions of the Lord and maintain perfect faith in
the wisdom of his Divine Charioteer. The Pandava must
also be considered to have indicated that, if he, in his
foolishness, were to raise doubts, even for the thousandth
time, Krishna should have the large-heartedness,
compassion and kindness patiently to explain them again
to his disciple. All through the Geeta we come across
many occasions when Arjuna punctuates Krishna's
message with his own doubts. Never does Krishna, even
once, grow impatient with his disciple. On the other hand,
each question, as it were, is seen to have added more
enthusiasm and interest to the discourses on the battle-
field.
8. I do not see that it would remove this sorrow that burns up
my senses, even if I should attain prosperous and unrivalled
dominion on earth, or even Lordship over the gods.
Arjuna is indicating here to Krishna the urgency for
guidance but for which he would be left to suffer the
voiceless agonies of an inward pain. The patient is unable
to explain or even to indicate vaguely, the source from
which the pain is rising in him.
61
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This mental sorrow in Arjuna is "blasting" even his sense
organs! Under the heavy burden of his sorrows he finds it
very difficult even to see or hear things properly. Even his
Indriyas (sense-organs), are being blasted by the
overheated sorrows within him.
It is natural for any reasonable human being to feel an
intellectual impastience to solve a problem of the mind
and thereby make it quiet and peaceful. Poor Arjuna also
has tried his best to bring some consolation to himself
through his own intellectual discrimination. The sorrow
that he felt was not for the acquisition and possession of
any sensuous object in the outer world, because, as his
own words indicate, he has already thought over them
and found that even an empire comprising the whole
earth, flourishing under his kingship --- nay, a lordship
over the gods even --- would not have wiped off his sense
of sorrow.
The urgency felt by Arjuna, as is evident from his own
words, may be considered as amounting to his burning
aspiration for liberating himself from the limitations of a
mortal. All that he needed to make himself perfect was
right discrimination (Viveka) which the 'LORD OF THE
SENSES' (Hrishikesha) gives him throughout the DIVINE
SONG.
Sanjaya said: 9. Having spoken thus to Hrishikesha, Gudakesha,
the destroyer of foes, said to Govinda: "I will not fight" ; and
became silent.
62
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This stanza and the following, together constitute the
running commentary of Sanjaya the faithful reporter of
the Geeta. He says that, after surrendering himself to
Krishna, seeking the Lord's guidance, Arjuna, the great
CONQUEROR OF SLEEP and the SCORCHER OF HIS
FOES, declared to Krishna, the Lord of the senses, that he
would not fight, and became silent.
No single individual alive at that period had the authority
to call back the armies from the field of Kurukshetra
except the blind old uncle of the Pandavas. He had the
status and the weight of opinion necessary for ordering a
truce even at a time when it looked as though the time had
slipped through the fingers. Sanjaya hoped that
Dhritarashtra would understand the futility of their
fighting against Arjuna, who would certainly conquer the
Kaurava forces, since the "Knotted-haired" warrior
(Gudakesha) had surrendered himself to the Lord of the
senses (Hrishikesha), the Winner of the World (Govinda).
But, Dhritarashtra was born-blind, and had grown deaf to
the words of warning uttered by the good, due to his
infinite attachment to his children.
10. To him who was despondent in the midst of the two armies,
Hrishikesha, as if smiling, O Bharata, spoke these words.
Thus standing between the two forces, the good and the
bad, arrayed for a battle to death, Arjuna (the jeeva)
surrenders completely, to the Lord (the subtler
discriminative intellect), his charioteer, who holds the five
63
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
horses (the five senses) yoked to his chariot (body), under
perfect control. When the stunned and confused ego ---
Arjuna --- totally surrenders to Krishna, the Lord, with a
smile, reassures the Jeeva of its final victory, and declares
the entire message of spiritual redemption, the Geeta. In
this sense we analyse the picture painted in Sanjaya's
words, borrowing our sanction from the Upanishads.
Once we agree to read this Upanishad-sense in the picture
painted here by the words of Sanjaya, we can discover in
it an Eternal Truth. When the ego (Arjuna) in its dejection
sits back in the body (chariot), throwing down all
instruments of ego-centric activities (Gandiva), and when
the sense-organs (the white-horses) are held back, well
under control, by the pulled-reins (the mind), then the
charioteer (the Pure Intellect) shall lend the ego a divine
strength, and guide it to the ultimate victory over the
forces of Adharma with the help of the dynamism of
Dharma, even though the former may seem much stronger
in force than the simple-looking dynamism in the latter.
The Blessed Lord said: 11. You have grieved for those that
should not be grieved for; yet, you speak words of wisdom. The
wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.
When we rightly diagnose Arjuna's dejection, it is not very
difficult for us to realise that, though its immediate cause
is the challenge of the war, his condition of mental torture
is only a symptom of a deeper disease. Just as a true
doctor will try to eradicate a disease, not by curing the
64
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
symptoms but by removing the CAUSE of the disease, so
too here, Lord Krishna is trying to remove the very source
of Arjuna's delusion.
The ego rises when the PURE SELF is not recognised; this
deep-seated ignorance in man not only veils his Divine
Nature from himself, but also projects on the REALITY a
positive misconception. The 'ego-centric-idea,' that he is
conditioned by his own body, mind and intellect, is the
true seed of Arjuna's delusory attachments with his own
relations and the consequent deep compassion that has
risen in his bosom to make him so impotent and helpless.
Grief and dejection are the price that delusion demands
from its victim. To rediscover ourselves to be really
something higher than our own ego, is to end all the
sorrows that have come to us, through our false
identifications.
Thus, the ETERNAL SPIRIT in man, asserting its false
relationships with his body, comes to feel bound by a
thousand relationships with the world of things and
beings. The same PERFECT-PRINCIPLE-IN-LIFE, playing
on the field of the mind, comes to experience the
imperfections of the emotional world as its own. Again,
the DIVINE-SPARK-OF-LIFE, assuming, as it often does, a
false identity with the intellect, comes to sob and suffer for
its hopes and desires, its ambitions and ideologies, which
are the characteristic pre-occupastions of the intellect.
65
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The SELF, thus getting reflected in the intellect, the body,
and the senses, is the ego, which is the victim of the world
of objects, feelings and ideas. To this ego, belong all the
sad destinies of life as well as its fleeting thrills of
acquisition and possession. The ego in Arjuna suffered
neurosis, goaded by its own delusions and the consequent
misapprehensions. Krishna, in his INFINITE WISDOM,
knew that MIS-APPREHENSION OF REALITY can take
place only because of a pitiable NON-APPREHENSION
OF REALITY. Therefore, in order to cure the very source
of Arjuna's delusion, Krishna is here teaching him the
cream of knowledge, as declared in the immortal books of
the Hindus, the Upanishads.
A re-education of the mind through metaphysical and
psychic methods is the last word in psycho-therapy,
which the East gave to the world, many thousand years
ago. Krishna starts his entire Geeta lesson with this
attempt at the re-education of Arjuna.
True to that traditional cultural concept of education, here,
the Great Master, Krishna, starts his instructions to Arjuna
with a direct discourse upon the ETERNAL REALITY.
The inner equipments of both Bhishma and Drona
allowed through them a glorious expression of the LIFE
PRINCIPLE or the Soul in them, and these great men were
incomparable due to this Divine shine that beamed out
through them. In this clashing of weapons, to consider
that the cultural soul of Bhishma will be wounded, or that
66
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the life of Drona, the master-archer and military genius,
will be ended, is a delusory concept of an uninitiated
intellect. By this statement Krishna has indicated to
Arjuna a greater Self than the ego in every embodiment.
At every level of our personality, we view Life and come
to our own conclusions about things. Thus, we have a
PHYSICAL ESTIMATE of the world from the body level,
quite distinct from the EMOTIONAL PICTURE of life
from the mental level, and also an INTELLECTUAL
CONCEPT of life from the level of the intellect.
Physically, what I see as a woman, is mentally my mother
and intellectually, the same sacred feminine form is a
bundle of cells, each having in its protoplasmic content, a
nucleus that presides over all its functions. The
imperfections that I see in a physical object will fail to give
me misery, if I successfully gild it with my emotional
appreciation. Similarly, an object which is physically
abhorrent and mentally shameful will still fail to provide
me with any sorrow, if I can appreciate it from my
intellectual level.
So, that which gives me despondency and dejection at the
physical, mental and intellectual levels can yield a
thrilling inspiration if I re-view it from the spiritual level.
Krishna is advising Arjuna to renounce his physical,
emotional and intellectual estimates of his teacher and his
grandsire, and those of the whole battle-field problem,
67
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and to re-evaluate the situation through his spiritual
understanding.
This great and transcendental Truth has been so suddenly
expounded here that it has, on Arjuna, the stunning effect
of a sudden unexpected blast. We shall, later on,
understand how this subtle, psycho-physical shock-
therapy did immeasurable good to the hysterical
condition of Arjuna.
"WHY DO THEY DESERVE NO GRIEF? BECAUSE THEY
ARE ETERNAL. HOW?" THE LORD SAYS:
12. It is not that at any time (in the past) , indeed, was I not, nor
were you, nor these rulers of men. Nor, verily, shall we all ever
cease to be hereafter.
Krishna here declares, in unequivocal terms, that the
embodied Self in every one is set on a great pilgrimage in
which It comes to identify itself with varied forms,
temporarily to gain a limited but determined, set of
experiences. He says that neither He Himself nor Arjuna
nor the great kings of the age that have assembled in both
the armies, are mere accidental happenings. They do not
come from nowhere and, at their death, do not become
mere non-existent nothingness. Correct philosophical
thinking guides man's intellect to the apprehension of a
continuity from the past --- through the present --- to the
endless future. The Spirit remaining the same, It gets
68
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seemingly conditioned by different body-equipments and
comes to live through its self-ordained environments.
It is this conclusion of the Hindu philosophers that has
given them the most satisfactory THEORY OF
REINCARNATION. The most powerful opponents of this
idea do not seem to have studiously followed their own
scriptures. Christ Himself has, if not directly, at least
indirectly, proclaimed this doctrine when He told His
disciples: "John, the Baptist, was Elijah." Origen, the most
learned of the Christian Fathers, has clearly declared:
"Every man received a body for himself according to his
deserts in former lives."
There was no great thinker in the past who had not, nor
any in the present who has not accepted, expressly or
tacitly, these logical conclusions about the DOCTRINE OF
REINCARNATION. Buddha constantly made references
to his previous births. Virgil and Ovid regarded the
doctrine as perfectly self-evident. Josephus observed that
the belief in reincarnation was widely accepted among the
Jews of his age. Solomon's BOOK OF WISDOM says: "To
be born in sound body with sound limbs is a reward of the
virtues of the past lives."
And who does not remember the famous saying of the
learned son of Islam who declared, "I died out of the stone
and I became a plant; I died out of the plant and became
an animal; I died out of the animal and became a man.
69
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Why then should I fear to die? When did I grow less by
dying? I shall die out of man and shall become an angel!!"
In later times, this most intelligent philosophical belief has
been accepted as a doctrine by the German philosophers
Goethe, Fichte, Schelling and Lessing. Among the recent
philosophers, Hume, Spencer, Max Mueller, have all
recognised this doctrine as incontrovertible. Among the
poets of the West also, we find many burnished intellects
soaring into the cloudless sky of imagination and within
their poetic flights they too have intuitively felt the
sanction behind this immortal doctrine-Browning,
Rossetti, Tennyson and Wordsworth, to mention but a few
names.
The REINCARNATION THEORY is not a mere dream of
the philosophers, and the day is not far far off when, with
the fast-developing science of Psychology, the West will
come to rewrite its Scripture under the sheer weight of
observed phenomena. An uncompromising intellectual
quest for understanding life cannot satisfy itself if it is
thwarted at every corner by "observed irregularities." We
cannot, for long, ignore them all as mere 'chances.' The
prodigy Mozart is a spectacular instance which cannot be
explained away; to be logical we must accept the idea of
the continuity of the embodied souls. This genius. wrote
Sonatas at the age of four, played in public at the age of
five, composed his first Opera at the age of seven! Without
the REINCARNATION THEORY, we will have to label
70
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
this wondrous incident as an accident and throw it into
the dust-bin of chance and bury it there!!
Examples are often noticed, but rarely recorded as
evidences, to prove this great THEORY OF
REINCARNATION. The modern world, as I said, has yet
to discover this great and self-evident LAW OF LIFE.
Therefore, to an uninitiated student, this theory may seem
too staggering for quiet appreciation. When Krishna
declared that none of them, including himself, Arjuna and
the great kings, even after their deaths on the battle-field
"shall cease to exist in future," Arjuna, a typical man-of-the
world could not grasp it as a self-evident fact. His
questioning eyes made the Lord explain again the idea
through an example in the following stanza.
"WHY DO THEY DESERVE NO GRIEF? FOR THEY ARE
ETERNAL IN ESSENCE. HOW?"... THE LORD SAYS:
13. Just as in this body the embodied (soul) passes into
childhood, youth and old age, so also does he pass into another
body; the firm man does not grieve at it.
It is the law of memory that the experiencer and the
memoriser must both be the same entity; then alone can
memory power function. I cannot remember any of YOUR
experiences nor can YOU remember any of MY
experiences; I can remember my experiences as readily
and easily as you can remember your experiences.
71
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In old age, everyone of us can remember the main
incidents of his own childhood and youth. In the progress
of growth, childhood dies away and youth appears, and
youth dies before old age can assert itself. In the old man,
it is self-evident that neither his childhood nor his youth is
with him, and yet, he can remember his own early days.
Applying the principle of memory, it becomes quite clear
then that 'SOMETHING' in us is common in all the
different stages of our growth so that the same entity
remembers the experiences gained by it in the past
through the childish body, and later, through the youthful
structure.
Thus, youthfulness may be considered as a birth, when
childhood has met with its death. So too, old age is born
when youth is dead. And yet, none of us is the least
disturbed by these changes; on the other hand, we feel, in
fact, happier due to the wealth of experiences we have
gained as the status of the body rose from innocent
childhood to matured old age.
Using this subjective experience of every one in the world
as a standard of comparison, Krishna is trying to bring
home to Arjuna that wise men do not worry when they
leave one body for the purpose of taking another one.
This stanza is again asserting, in unequivocal terms, the
truth behind the Reincarnation Theory. And thus viewed,
death can no more be a threat to a wise man. We do not
moan at the death of childhood following which alone can
72
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
we come to experience youth; we are confident in our
knowledge that though youth is entered into and
childhood has ended, there is a continuity of existence of
the same one only, so, a child has now become a youth. So
too, at the moment of death, there is no extinction of the
individuality, but the embodied-ego of the dead-body
leaves its previous structure, and according to the vasanas
(mental impressions) that it had gathered during its
embodiment, it gets identified with a physical equipment,
where it can express itself completely, and seek its perfect
fulfilment.
14. The contacts of senses with objects, O son of Kunti, which
cause heat and cold, pleasure and pain, have a beginning and an
end; they are impermanent; endure them bravely, O descendant
of Bharata.
According to the accepted theory of perception in Vedanta,
an object is perceived not BY the sense-organs but
THROUGH them. The Indriyas are instruments through
which the perceiving-ego gathers the knowledge of the
various objects. If the perceiver is not actually contacting
the objects through the sense-organs, the objects, as such,
cannot bring any perception to him.
That the same objects can give two different types of
experiences to two different individuals is very well-
known. The object remaining the same, if it can give
different experiences, it is evident that it is because of the
difference in the mental composition of the individuals. It
73
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
is also observed that, objects of one's intense fancy during
a certain stage in one's life, become a nuisance to the same
individual after a time; for, as time passes on, the mental
constitution of the individual also changes. In short, it is
very clear that the external objects can convey their stimuli
and give us an experience only when our minds come in
contact with the objects through the sense-organs.
He who can understand that the objects of the world are
in a state of flux, are constantly coming into existence and
perishing --- he will not allow himself to be tossed about
by the existence or non-existence of the finite things of the
world. In the flood of time, things and incidents,
circumstances and environments flow up to our present
from the unknown FUTURE, to give us vivid experiences
of varied intensity, and they, in their very nature, cannot
remain permanently, but must, of necessity, pass on to
become one with the entire PAST. Nothing can remain the
same, even for a short period, in the world-of-objects
where change alone is the changeless law.
Having understood this finite nature of the changeable
objects-of-the-world, wherein everyone of them has a
beginning and an end, on no occasion need a wise man
despair the least, of things THAT ARE, or of things THAT
ARE NOT. Heat and cold, success or failure, pain or joy ---
none of them can be permanent.
Since every situation, of its own nature, must keep on
changing, it would be foolish to get ourselves upset at
74
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
every change noticed. It is wisdom to suffer them meekly
with the comfort and consolation of the knowledge of
their finite nature. It is the attitude of the wise to go
through life, both in joy and sorrow, in success and
failure, in pain and joy, with the constant awareness:
"Even this will pass away."
The external world of challenges is finite inasmuch as it
has a beginning and an end. Not only that, Krishna adds,
"they are impermanent by their very nature." By the term
'impermanent' used here, the Lord means that the same
object which gives pleasure at one moment starts yielding,
at another moment, pain to the experiencer. This
inconsistency is indicated by the term 'anitya' in the
stanza.
WHAT GOOD WILL ACCRUE TO HIM WHO IS
INDIFFERENT TO HEAT AND COLD AND THE LIKE? -
-- LISTEN:
15. That firm man whom, surely, these afflict not, O chief
among men, to whom pleasure and pain are the same, is fit for
realising the Immortality of the Self.
Calm endurance, both in pleasure and pain, is a condition
necessary for right knowledge of the true Self; this is the
technique of Self-realisation, as explained in the
Upanishadic lore. Based upon that fact, here Lord Krishna
explains that one who has found in himself a mental
equipoise, wherein he is not afflicted or disturbed by
75
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
circumstances of pain and pleasure, he alone "IS FIT FOR
ATTAINING IMMORTALITY."
When the TRANSCENDENTAL TRUTH or the ETERNAL
PERFECTION has been indicated by the term
Immortality, the term is not used in its limited sense of
'deathlessness' of the body. Here the term 'death' not only
indicates the destruction of the physical embodiment but
also includes and incorporates within its significance, the
entire range of finite experiences, where, in each one of
them, there is an extinction-experience. No experience
gained through either the body, or the mind, or the
intellect is permanent.
In other words, each experience is born to live with us for
a short period and then to die away in us. These chains of
finite experiences stretch out in front of us as the paths of
sorrow and pain in our life. The term 'Immortality,' used
by the Rishi to indicate the 'Supermanhood,' indicates a
state wherein one, walking the path of endless sorrows, as
the individual ego, transcends that state to attain the
Infinite experience of THE ETERNAL AND THE
PERMANENT.
Through the Geeta, our poet-seer Vyasa is making Lord
Krishna declare that the purpose of life for every one is the
attainment of PERFECTION, and to evolve oneself to it
one must make use of every little chance in one's allotted
span of life. To endure meekly, with magnanimous joy,
the little pin-pricks of life --- heat and cold, success and
76
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
failure, pain and joy --- is the highest training that life can
provide to all of us.
An incompetent idler's hapless endurance of life, is not in
itself what is indicated here. It is especially said that the
equipoise of the mind, both in pleasure and sorrow,
entertain by a "wise man" (Dheerah) makes him fit for the
highest cultural self-development. That is to say, the
equanimity should not flow from the dark caves of one's
stupidity and inertia, but it must gurgle forth from the
open sunny fields of wisdom and understanding. When
one understands the essential nature of the objects-of-the-
world to be finite, out of that realised knowledge one
gains enough balance for calm endurance and does not
feel exalted in pleasure nor dejected in pain.
So long as we live in the body, as the body, we are not
able to ignore or calmly endure the sorrows of the body.
But, when we are fired by a sentiment of love or hatred,
we invariably make ready sacrifices of bodily pleasures.
Because of my love for my son, I am ready to make any
sacrifice of my physical needs, so that I may give him a
good education, etc. When, intellectually, one gets fired by
some idea or ideology, for the satisfaction of it, one readily
ignores and overlooks the comforts and pleasures of one's
body and mind. The martyrs and revolutionaries in the
world could, with pleasure, face physical persecutions and
mental agonies for the satisfaction of their intellectual
lives and for the fulfilment of their ideals and ideologies.
77
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, IT IS PROPER
THAT YOU SHOULD ABANDON YOUR GRIEF AND
DISTRESSING DELUSION AND SHOULD CALMLY
ENDURE HEAT AND COLD, ETC. FOR:
16. The unreal has no being; there is no non-being of the Real;
the truth about both these has been seen by the Knowers of the
Truth (or the Seers of the Essence) .
In Vedantic literature, the Real and the Un-real are very
scientifically distinguished. These two categories are not
considered as indefinables in our ancient scriptures;
though they do not declare these to be definables. The
Rishis have clearly indicated what constitutes the REAL
and what are the features of the UN-REAL. "That which
was not in the past and which will not be in the future,
but, that which seemingly exists only in the present is
called the un-Real." In the language of the Karika, "That
which is non-existent in the beginning and in the end, is
necessarily non-existent in the intermediate stages also;
objects, we see, are illusory, still they are regarded as real."
Naturally, the Real is "that which defies all changes and
remains the same in all the periods of time: past, present
and future." Thus, in an ordinary example, when one
misunderstands a post in the dark to be a ghost, the ghost-
vision is considered unreal as compared to the post;
because, the hallucination cannot be permanent and it
does not remain after the re-discovery of the post.
Similarly, on waking up from our dream, we do not get
78
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
anxious to provide for our dream-children; because, as
soon as we wake up, we realise that the dream was unreal.
Before we went to bed, the dream-children were not with
us, and after waking up, our dream-children are no more
with us; thus we understand and realise that our dream-
children, whom we loved and tended as real during our
dream, are, in fact, unreal. By significance, therefore, the
Real is that which exists at all times: in the past, the
present and the future. The post is relatively real --- it was,
it is and it will be.
The life in our matter envelopments, we know, is finite,
inasmuch as every little experience, at all the three levels
of our existence --- among the objects, with our
sentiments, in the company of our ideas --- in finite. The
body changes at every moment; the mind evolves and the
intellect grows. All changes, evolutionary movements and
growths, are indicated by a constant-death of their
previous state, in order that the thing concerned may
change, evolve or grow. The body, the mind and the
intellect are ever-changing in us, and all of them,
therefore, according to our definition, cannot be Real.
But is there a Real entity behind it all? In order that
change may take place, no doubt, a changeless substratum
is necessary. For the waters of the river to flow, a
motionless river-bed must exist. Similarly, in order to hold
together the millions of experiences at the levels of our
body, mind and intellect, and to give us the experience of
a synchronised whole --- which we call life --- we must,
79
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
necessarily, have some substratum, changeless and real,
which is common to all three.
Something in us remains, as it were, unchanged all
through our changes, holding the vivid experiences
together as a thread holds the beads in a necklace. On
closer analysis, it becomes clear that it can be nothing
other than the Self in us, the Pure Awareness. Experiences
that have come under one's awareness do not constitute
any vital aspect of one's own Self; life is the sum total of
experiences that have been devised by the touch of one's
illuminating Consciousness. In childhood, I was conscious
of my childhood-life; in my youth, I was conscious of my
youthful life; and in my old age, I am again conscious of
my present experiences. The Consciousness remaining the
same, endless experiences came under it, got illumined
and died away. This Awareness by which I become
conscious of things in my life --- because of which I am
considered as alive, but for which I will have no more
existence in this given embodiment --- "That" Spiritual
Entity, Eternal and All-Pervading, Unborn and Undying,
the One Changeless Factor, is the Infinite in me. And this
Atman is the Real.
Men of knowledge and wisdom have known the essence,
the meaning and the implication of both these: the Self
and the non-Self, the Real and the Unreal, which in their
mysterious combination constitute the strange
phenomenon called the world.
80
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHAT THEN IS THAT WHICH IS EVER REAL? LISTEN:
17. Know That to be Indestructible by which all this is pervaded.
None can cause the destruction of That --- the Imperishable.
The REAL is that which envelops everything that exists,
and which is the very stuff and substance of all the worlds
of perceptions, which we experience. Different mud-pots,
each different in form, shape and colour, may have
different names according to the things they contain or
according to the purpose for which they are used. Though
each of them has thus a different name, yet, all of them
are, we may say, enveloped by --- or permeated with one
and the same stuff, the mud, without which none of the
pots can exist. From mud they came; in mud they exist;
and when they are destroyed, their names and forms shall
merge back to become mud. All the mud-pots are
enveloped by mud which is the Reality holding the world
of mud-pots together.
Similarly, the world of finite changes is entirely permeated
through and through and enveloped by the REAL, the
Changeless. And Bhagawan adds that there is no
possibility of this REAL, even for a moment, ever getting
destroyed, even by a fraction.
WHAT THEN IS THE UNREAL (ASAT) WHOSE
EXISTENCE IS NOT CONSTANT? LISTEN:
81
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
18. They have an end, it is said, these bodies of the embodied-
Self. The Self is Eternal, Indestructible, Incomprehensible.
Therefore, fight, O Bharata.
The physical forms, constituted of matter envelopments,
are all perishable equipments for the indwelling-Self,
which is the Eternal Factor, ever in Its nature, changeless,
indestructible, and incomprehensible. By the term EVER
CHANGELESS, the Supreme is indicated as Eternal
because the non-eternals, by their nature, must be ever-
changing, change being the insignia of the finite. Here, by
using the two terms: Eternal (Nityah) and Indestructible
(Anashinah), the Lord is indicating that neither a total nor a
partial destruction is possible in the Supreme.
By qualifying the Eternal as UNKNOWABLE it is not, in
any sense, intended to indicate that the Supreme is
'unknown.' Here, the term 'unknowable' is only meant to
express that it is not knowable through the usual organs-
of-perception. The sense-organs are the instruments
through which the Consciousness beams out and in ITS
awareness, objects get illumined. These instruments of
cognition, whether they be sense-organs, or the mind or
the intellect, are in themselves, inert and can have their
knowledge of perception only when they are dynamised
by the Consciousness, the Spark-of-Life. As such, these
organs cannot make the Consciousness an object of their
apprehension. Therefore, in terms of our most common
source of knowledge --- direct perception --- the Shastra
82
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
says here that the Supreme is 'unknowable,' It being self-
determined (Swatah siddhah).
THEREFORE, FIGHT, O DESCENDANT OF BHARATA -
-- This is, really, not a command to fight. A religion that is
built upon the concept of extreme forgiveness and large-
hearted tolerance, as envisaged in the principle of "non-
violence," could not have raised a slogan of chaos or
revolutionary blood-thirstiness in its very scripture. Such
an interpretation is the unintentioned mischief of a
commentator, who does not read the Geeta in the context
of the Mahabharata.
The words "Fight, O Son of India," means that it is a
religious call to every Hindu to discard his defeatist
mentality and face, whole-heartedly and sincerely, the
situations, in every given field of his life, at every given
moment of his existence. Active resistance to evil is the
Krishna-creed in the Geeta.
THE LORD NOW QUOTES TWO VEDIC MANTRAS TO
CONFIRM THE VIEW THAT GEETA SHASTRA IS
INTENDED TO REMOVE THE CAUSE OF SAMSARA,
SUCH AS GRIEF AND DELUSION. "IT IS ONLY A
FALSE NOTION OF YOURS," SAYS THE LORD, "THAT
YOU THINK THUS: 'BHISHMA AND OTHERS, WILL BE
KILLED BY ME IN THE BATTLE; I WILL BE THEIR
SLAYER'..." HOW?
83
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
19. He who takes the Self to be the slayer and he who thinks He
is slain, neither of these knows. He slays not, nor in He slain.
The Self, being Immutable, It is neither slain nor can It be
the slayer. Those who think that they have been slain
when the body is slain and those who feel that they are
the slayers, both of them know not the Real Nature of the
Self and hence they but prattle meaningless assertions.
That which is killed is the perishable body and the
delusory arrogation, "I am slain" belongs to the ego-centre.
The Self is that which is beyond the body and the ego,
since the Pure Consciousness is the Illuminator of both,
the body and the ego. In short, being Immutable, the Self
can neither be the agent nor the object of the action-of-
slaying.
HOW IS THE SELF IMMUTABLE? THIS IS ANSWERED
IN THE NEXT VERSE.
20. He is not born, nor does He ever die; after having been, He
again ceases not to be; Unborn, Eternal, Changeless and
Ancient, He is not killed when the body is killed.
This stanza labours to deny in the Self all the symptoms of
mutability that are recognised and experienced by the
body. The body is prone to different changes and these
modifications are the sources of all sorrows in every
embodiment. These six changes are common to all, and
they may be enumerated as: birth, existence, growth,
decay, disease and death. These changes are the common
84
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
womb of all pains in a mortal's life. All these are denied in
the Self, in this stanza, to prove the immutability of the
Self.
Unlike the physical body, the Self is not born, It being the
Eternal Factor that exists at all times. Waves are born and
they die away but the ocean is not born with the waves;
nor does it die away when the waves disappear. Since
there is no birth, there is no death; things that have a
beginning alone can end; the rising waves alone can moan
their dying conditions. Again, it is explained that like the
birth of a child, who was not existing before and who has
come to exist after the birth, the Atman is not something
that has come to be born due to or because of the body.
Thus, the Self is unborn and eternal --- birthless and
deathless (Ajah, Nityah).
HAVING THUS STATED THE PROPOSITION THAT
THE SELF IS NEITHER AN AGENT NOR AN OBJECT
OF THE ACTION OF SLAYING, AND HAVING
ESTABLISHED, BY ARGUMENTS, THE IMMUTABILITY
OF THE SELF, LORD KRISHNA HERE CONCLUDES
THE PROPOSITION AS FOLLOWS:
21. Whosoever knows Him to be Indestructible, Eternal,
Unborn, and Inexhaustible, how can that man slay, O Partha,
or cause others to be slain?
Summarising what is said so far, as the Law of Being
(Dharma) of the Self, which indicated rather than defined
85
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the Eternal, Immutable Reality, in this stanza, we have, in
the form of an interrogation, an assertion that those who
know this shall have thereafter, no dejection or sorrow in
facing life's realities.
Having known the Self to be Indestructible, Eternal,
Unborn and Inexhaustible, Krishna asks Arjuna, "How can
one arrogate to oneself the stupid idea of agency?" The
Lord says that neither can such an individual cause
someone to slay nor himself be a slayer. In the context of
the given situation, Krishna advises thus. It is interesting
to note that He means both Himself and Arjuna by His
words. If this knowledge of the Reality has come to the
intellectual appreciation and acceptance of Arjuna, he will
have no more justification to feel himself to be the killer of
the Unborn.
IN WHAT WAY IS THE SELF INDESTRUCTIBLE? HERE,
IN THE FOLLOWING, IS AN EXPLANATORY
EXAMPLE:
22. Just as a man casts off his worn out clothes and puts on new
ones, so also the embodied-Self casts off its worn out bodies and
enters others which are new.
This is one of the oft-quoted famous stanzas in the Geeta
which, by a very striking example, explains to us how the
ego-centric entity in an individual readily leaves its
associations with one set of equipments, and arrogates to
itself another conducive envelopment for living a new set
86
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of its required experiences. The example that Vyasa uses is
so universal that from the Lord's own mouth it rings with
a note of irresistible appeal.
Just as an individual changes his clothes to suit the
convenience of the occasion, so too the ego-centre discards
one physical form and takes to another, which will be
most suited for it to gain the next required type of
experiences. No one will plan to go to his office in his
night-gown, nor will he, in his stiff-collar, feel happy
while playing tennis in the evening. He changes his dress
according to the field where he is intending to work for
the time being. Similar is the why and wherefore of death
and thereafter.
This striking example, which comes within the
comprehension of every one, is made use of by the Lord
so that, not only Arjuna, but even those who are over-
hearing these eighteen discourses, even at this distant
time, may come to understand the idea clearly.
Changing of our clothes that have become worn out,
cannot be a pain to anyone of us, especially when it is for
the purpose of putting on a new set of clothes. Similarly,
when a mind-intellect-equipment finds that its
embodiment in a given form can no longer help it to earn,
from its available environments, experiences that would
facilitate its evolutionary pilgrimage, it feels that this
particular form is worn out (Jeerna). This "worn out"
condition of a body is to be decided neither by its age nor
87
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
by its biological condition. Nor can anybody other than its
wearer, the ego, decide it.
Critics rise up in hosts, however, against the truth of this
stanza and their main platform of arguments is built upon
the observed facts of young people dying away in the
bloom of their life. In the observers' opinion, the
individual was young and his body was not worn out
(Jeerna), but from the standpoint of the evolutionary
necessity of the ego concerned, that body was already
useless for it. A rich man feels like changing his house or
vehicle almost every year, and he invariably finds ready
purchasers. As far as the rich owner is concerned, the
thing has become useless for him while for the purchaser
it is "as good as new." Similarly, here nobody else can
decide, whether a given body is worn out or not, except its
"wearer."
In short, the stanza emphasizes the doctrine of
reincarnation which we have already explained in an
earlier stanza.
On the whole, it must have definitely conveyed to Arjuna
the idea that death grins only at those who have no
understanding, and that it has no pain for those who
understand its implications and working. Just as changing
the dress is no pain to the body, so too, when the dweller
in the body leaves the envelopment there is no pain
possible; again, undressing does not mean that thereafter
we will ever live naked, so too, the embodied Self, ere
88
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
long, discovers an appropriate equipment from which to
function so as to earn for itself new sets of experiences.
Evolution and change are all for the mind-and-intellect
and not for the Self. The Self is perfect and changeless, and
needs no evolution.
WHY IS THE SELF CHANGELESS? THE LORD SAYS:
23. Weapons cleave It not, fire burns It not, water moistens It
not, wind dries It not.
The unseen is always explained in terms of the seen, and
thereby the unknown becomes fully indicated, rather than
defined; for, any unknown thing merely defined in itself
remains as unknown as before. Similarly, here the
Changeless, Immutable, Self is being described by Lord
Krishna in terms of the mutable and everchanging world
which is very familiar to Arjuna and all people like us. In
the world-of-change, objects come to their annihilation
through instruments of death or they are consumed by
fire or destroyed by water or dried up by air. These are the
various cosmic means and methods by which the objects
of the world come to their destruction. All these means are
declared as impotent in bringing about the destruction of
the Self.
WEAPONS CLEAVE IT NOT --- It is very well-known
that with an axe one can cut down a thing, and with a
bullet one can shoot some other object, but neither can one
wound water, fire, air or space with a sword, however
89
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sharp it might be. The principle is that no instrument can
hit or destroy an element subtler than itself. Naturally,
therefore, Atman, the Self, the very cause of the subtlest
element, space, and necessarily therefore, subtler than
space, cannot be cut asunder by the gross instruments.
FIRE CANNOT BURN IT --- Fire generally can burn
things other than the fire, but it cannot burn itself. The
burning capacity in fire is the very Essence, the Truth in it,
and therefore, fire cannot burn its own Essence, viz., its
fiery nature. Wherever there is fire, it can consume things
only in space and yet, space is never consumed by fire.
Things are consumed by fire in space. If space itself cannot
be consumed by fire, how impotent it must feel when it
tries to consume the cause of space, the Self?
WATER CANNOT MOISTEN IT --- Things get soaked
only when they have got inter-space in themselves. A
piece of bread can be soaked in water or milk, but, a piece
of iron cannot be soaked, as iron has no inter-space in it.
When the substance is one homogeneous mass containing
nothing other than itself to condition it, water cannot enter
the substance and, therefore, cannot soak it. Another
method of destruction observed is either through the
quick effects of water, that is drowning, etc., or through
the slow effects of moisture, such as corroding, etc. Even
these cannot destroy the Truth.
WIND DRIES IT NOT --- Dehydration is possible only
when there are some traces of water in the substance
90
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
dehydrated. Every crystal has its own water of
crystallisation, which, when removed, causes the crystals
to lose their distinct shapes and forms and get pulverised
into a fine powder. These are days when vegetables and
food materials are dehydrated for purposes of
preservation. This is possible because these substances
contain moisture-molecules within them. The Supreme
Consciousness contains nothing other than Itself and
therefore, annihilation through the process of dehydration
is not possible.
Apart from this direct word-meaning, on the whole, the
stanza indicates deeper significances which are better
brought out in the next stanza, where Lord Krishna gives
out how and why the truth is Eternal.
FOR WHAT REASON? WHY AND HOW CAN WE
RECOGNISE THE SELF TO BE ETERNAL?
24. This Self cannot be cut, nor burnt, nor moistened, nor dried
up. It is eternal, all-pervading, stable immovable and ancient.
It is amply clear that if a thing cannot be annihilated by
any of the known methods of destruction of nature, or
those invented and perfected by man, then that given
object must be everlasting.
Here, in the second line, we have a series of qualities
listed, indicating the Truth; they are not a haphazard
collection of terms picked up at random and used in haste.
91
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Each word is chosen as a sequence to the previous one.
That which has indestructibility, as indicated in the first
line, should necessarily be everlasting (Nityah). That
which is thus Eternal must be necessarily All-Pervading
(Sarvagatah).
"ALL-PERVADING" is a short term of inconceivable
depth of significance. ALL-PERVADING is that which
pervades everywhere and, therefore, there is nothing that
is not pervaded by the "ALL-PERVASIVE." The Eternal
truth envelops all, and the ALL-PERVADING has no
shape, since that which has a shape is conditioned all
along its outline by something other than itself.
A man with a head, a trunk and limbs has a shape,
because all around him, along his outline, is space, which
is something other than the carbon-material of his skull
and bones. A thing conditioned should necessarily have a
form of its own. By the term "ALL-PERVADING," it is
meant that it has only Itself all round It and at all places,
and that It is unconditioned by anything other than Itself.
A truth that is thus Eternal (Nityah), Homogeneous and
All-Pervading (Sarvagatah) must necessarily be "Stable"
(Sthanuh) because no change can ever take place in it. That
which is thus Stable must be "Firm" (Achalah); for, it
cannot shake or move, since movement implies the
transfer of a thing from one set of time and place to
another set of time and place where it was not. Since the
Self is All-pervading, there is no spot in space, or period in
92
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
time, where It is not already, and therefore --- just as I
cannot move myself in myself --- the Self cannot move
anywhere. A motionless thing is indeed "Firm" (Achalah).
Here the two terms "Stable" (Sthanuh) and "Firm" (Achalah)
may seem to be a tautology: both having almost the same
meaning. But the former means stability at the base, as in
the case of a banyan-tree. At the base of the trunk it is
stable and yet at the top it is moving. Truth is 'stable' at
the 'base' and 'firm' at the 'top'. In Its Infinite glory, It has
no movement anywhere.
Sanatanah --- that which is ancient. The implication of this
term can fall under two categories: the obvious and the
suggestive. The OBVIOUS meaning indicates that the Self
is not new (Nutanah) but it is ancient and, therefore, we, as
students of Brahma-Vidya, need not hesitate to accept it, as
we necessarily would if the theory were a modern
ideology which was yet to be verified by observed
experimental data. In its suggestiveness, the term
Sanatanah implies that the Self is unconditioned by time
and place. Perfection gained, whether it be in India, or at
the North Pole, in the present generation, or in the chaste
periods of the Vedic culture, in all places and at all times,
by all seers, in all the religions of the world, the Self-
experience at the time of God-realisation, can only be one
and the same.
MOREOVER, BHAGAWAN ADDS:
93
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
25. This (Self) is said to be Unmanifest, Unthinkable and
Unchangeable. Therefore, knowing This to be such, you should
not grieve.
This Eternal, All-Pervading Self is certainly Unmanifest,
Unthinkable, and Unchangeable, and therefore, having
known this truth in Its essential nature, Krishna argues
that it is neither possible to kill nor to get really killed.
Each of these terms is quite expressive of certain logical
truths.
UNMANIFEST --- The five Great Elements that we know,
when they become subtler, they lose their capacity to
impinge themselves upon our sense perceptions:
considered from 'Earth' to 'Air,' we find the elements
progressively getting subtler for our perceptions and
finally 'Ether' or 'Space,' by itself, cannot be perceived
directly by our senses at all. However, the five Great
Elements can, to some extent, be perceived through our
sense-organs. But the CAUSE of 'Ether, ' the subtlest of the
Five Elements, is too subtle for our perception, and
therefore we will have to assume that it is Unmanifest.
A thing is called manifest when we can perceive it
through one or the other of our sense-organs. That which
is beyond all five sense-organs is called Unmanifest. I
cannot see, smell, hear, taste or touch a full-grown mango
tree in a mango seed, and yet, I know that the seed is the
cause for the tree. Under the circumstances, the tree is said
to be in an 'unmanifest' condition in the seed. Similarly,
94
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
when they say that truth is Unmanifest, they only mean
that It cannot be perceived through any of our sense-
organs. In the Upanishads, we have exhaustive
explanations of why our senses cannot have the Eternal as
an object of sense-perceptions. It is the very subject
because of which the sense-organs can perceive.
UNTHINKABLE --- After denying the sense-organs any
play in the field of Truth, we are told that the human mind
also cannot think, nor can the human intellect ruminate
over and comprehend the Infinite. The Self being the very
life that energises the mind and the intellect, which by
themselves are inert and insentient, it becomes obvious
that the mind and intellect cannot make the Self an object
of their comprehension. A telescope-gazer cannot see
himself with his telescope; he cannot be at once the seer
and the seen. Thus here, the Lord's word "Unthinkable" is
to be understood as meaning 'Incomprehensible' by the
mind and the intellect of the seeker.
UNCHANGEABLE --- This term indicates that the Self is
without parts because things that have parts in themselves
are things which have "form," and those that have "form"
must necessarily come under the category of the FINITE
and exhibit in themselves various modifications and
changes.
By these terms, Truth is declared as Immutable,
Unmanifest, Unthinkable and Unchangeable.
95
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Krishna thus advises Arjuna to end his grief. He who
understands the Eternal nature of the Self can have neither
the occasion to perceive himself as the slayer nor
recognise others as the slain.
GRANTING THAT THE SELF IS NOT EVER-LASTING,
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO GIVE THE MATERIALISTS'
POINT-OF-VIEW:
26. But even if you think of Him as being constantly born and
constantly dying, even then, O mighty-armed, you should not
grieve.
This and the following stanzas are arguments in which the
materialists' point-of-view has been, for the purpose of
argument, presented here by Krishna. According to them,
direct perception alone is an authority for belief. With this
standard for their knowledge, when they try to measure
life, they have to accept it as a constant flux of infinite-
births and infinite-deaths. Things are born; and they die
away. This whirl-of-birth-and-death is constant. And "this
constant change" is life to them. Krishna argues that, if life
is but a constant repetition of births and deaths, then also,
the hero (Mahabahu) that you are, you do not deserve to
grieve on this occasion.
ACCORDINGLY:
27. Indeed, certain is death for the born, and certain is birth for
the dead; therefore, over the inevitable, you should not grieve.
96
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
That which is born must die and after death things are
born again. Here, Krishna continues to view the whole
situation from the materialist angle. The materialists take
life to be a constant flood of appearances of forms, arising
from nowhere, and disappearing into nowhere. The
theists believe that the embodiments are taken up by the
individual-ego in order that it may eke out its experiences
and learn to grow in its understanding of life and
ultimately realise the Truth behind it all. Thus, this is a
comon meeting point of both the theists and the atheists;
that both of them believe life to be a continuous chain of
birth and death.
Thus, if life, be, in its very nature, a stream of births and
deaths, against this inevitable arrangement, no intelligent
man should moan. Standing out in the blazing summer
sun, one must, indeed, be stupid to complain against its
heat and glare. Similarly, having come to life, to complain
against the very nature of life is, indeed, an inexcusable
stupidity.
On this score also, to weep is to admit one's own
ignorance. Krishna's life, is, on the whole, a message of
cheer and joy. His doctrine of life is an insistence upon, "to
weep is folly and to smile is wisdom." "Keep smiling"
seems to be Krishna's philosophy put in two words, and
that is why, seeing his dear friend weeping in life, the
Lord gets whipped up, as it were, to an enthusiasm to
save Arjuna from his delusions, and bring him back to the
true purpose of life.
97
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
THE FOLLOWING TEN VERSES GIVE THE COMMON-
MAN'S VIEW. SHANKARA SAYS, "NEITHER IS IT
PROPER TO GRIEVE OVER BEINGS WHICH ARE MERE
COMBINATIONS OF (MATERIAL) CAUSES AND
EFFECTS; FOR":
28. Beings unmanifest in the beginning, and unmanifest again
in their end seem to be manifest in the middle, O Bharata. What
then is there to grieve about?
From this stanza onwards we have a beautiful
presentation of the whole problem of Arjuna from the
stand-point of the man-of-the-world. In these ten verses
Krishna explains the problem as viewed through the
goggles of a common man of the world and valued by his
intellectual judgement.
The material world of objects strictly follows the law of
causation. The world of "effects" rises from the world of
"causes." In a majority of cases, the effects are manifest
and the causes are unmanifest. 'To project from the
unmanifest to the manifest' is the programme of creation
of a thing, strictly following the Law of Causation.
Thus, the manifest-world of today was unmanifest before
its creation; and now for the time being, it is available for
cognition as fully manifest, only to fade away soon into
the unmanifest again. It amounts to saying that the
present came from the UNKNOWN and shall return to
the UNKNOWN. Even if viewed thus, why should one
98
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
moan; for, the spokes of a wheel that turns eternally must
COME DOWN only to RISE UP again.
Again, the dream-children, unmanifest before, and which
came to manifestation during the dream, become
unmanifest again on waking up. Why moan, you
bachelor, for a wife whom you had never married, who
had disappeared with your dream, the children unborn,
who dissolved away with your dream?
If there be, as Krishna says, an Infinite, Eternal, Truth
which is Changeless and Deathless, in which alone this
drama of change occurs, this whirl-of-birth-and-death
spins, how is it that we are not able to realise It even
though it is explained to us repeatedly? According to
Shankara, Lord Krishna here feels that He should not
blame Arjuna for his incapacity to understand the Self.
SHANKARA SAYS, "THE SELF JUST SPOKEN OF IS
VERY DIFFICULT TO REALISE. WHY SHOULD I
BLAME YOU ALONE, WHILE THE CAUSE,
IGNORANCE, IS COMMON TO ALL?" ONE MAY ASK:
HOW IS IT THAT THE SELF IS SO DIFFICULT TO
REALISE? THE LORD SAYS:
29. One sees This as a wonder; another speaks of This as a
wonder; another hears of This as a wonder; yet, having heard
none understands This at all!
99
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Eternal Absolute is explained to us as Infinite, All-
knowing and All-blissful. Our experience of ourselves is
that we are finite, ignorant and miserable. Thus, between
the Reality, which is our Self, and what we experience
ourselves to be, there seems to be as much difference as
between heat and cold, light and darkness. Why is it that
we are not able to recognise the Self, which is our Real
Nature?
In our ignorance, when we try to perceive the Truth, it
seems to be a goal to be reached at some distant place, in a
distant period of time. But in fact, if we are to believe the
Lord's words, the Self being our essential nature, we are
never far from It. A mortal is as far away from
Immortality --- the sinner is as far removed from a Saint ---
the imperfect is as far removed from Perfection --- as a
dreamer is from the waker.
Man awakened to the Self's Glory is God; God forgetful of
His own glory is the deluded man!
To the ego, the very existence of the subtler Self beyond
the body, mind and intellect is an idea that cannot even be
conceived of, and, when a mortal, through the techniques
of self-perfection, comes to recognise himself to be the
Self, he is struck with a wondrous ecstasy of that supra-
sensuous experience.
The emotion of wonder, when it rises in the mind, has the
capacity to black-out, for the time being, all cognitions,
100
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and the individual who has been struck with wonder,
forgets himself and becomes, for the moment, one with
the very emotion. As an experiment, try to completely
surprise somebody, and quietly watch his attitude. With
mouth open and his unseeing eyes protruding out, every
nerve in him stretched to the highest tension, the victim-
of-wonderment stands fixed to the spot as a statue carved
in moist, cold, flesh. The same is the thrilled hush of lived
joy in the Temple of Experience, when the Self, all alone
with the Self, comes to live as the Self. And, therefore, the
great Rishis of old borrowed the term 'wonderment' to
indicate to the student what exactly would be the
condition of his personality layers at the moment when
his ego drops off from the resplendent Infinite Form of the
Self.
True knowledge makes a man realise that he is "The Soul
with a body," but now in his ignorance, he thinks that he
is a "body with a soul." Those who LISTEN well are
encouraged to REFLECT on what they have heard and to
MEDITATE until they realise the Self. The unintelligent
listeners also feel encouraged, by the very same statement
expressing the rarity of this knowledge, to make repeated
attempts at listening (shravana), continuous reflection
(manana) and long contemplation (nididhyasana).
HERE THE LORD CONCLUDES THE SUBJECT OF THIS
SECTION, THUS:
101
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
30. This, the Indweller in the body of everyone is ever
indestructible, O Bharata; and, therefore, you should not grieve
for any creature.
The subtle Reality in each body, the indwelling Spirit in
every creature is Eternal and Indestructible. All that is
destroyed is only the container, the finite matter
envelopment. Therefore, Arjuna has been advised that he
should not grieve at facing his enemies and in the great
battle, even killing them, if need be. To bring out this idea,
the entire earlier section has been used by Krishna
wherein he argued so well to establish the Eternal nature
of the soul and the finite nature of the bodies. Shankara
rightly concludes that this stanza winds up the entire
section opened in verse 11.
HERE IN THIS VERSE, IT HAS BEEN SHOWN THAT
FROM THE STANDPOINT OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH,
THERE IS NO OCCASION FOR GRIEF AND
ATTACHMENT. NOT ONLY FROM THE STANDPOINT
OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH, BUT ALSO:
31. Further, looking at thine own duty thou oughtest not to
waver, for there is nothing higher for a KSHATRIYA than a
righteous war.
Arjuna's personal call-of-character (Swadharma) is that of a
leader of his generation (Kshatriya) and as such, when his
generation is called upon to answer a challenge of an
102
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
organised un-Aryan force (Adharma), it is his duty not to
waver but to fight and defend his sacred national culture.
To the leaders of people, there can be nothing nobler than
to get a glorious chance to fight for a righteous cause.
Here Arjuna has been called upon to fight a righteous war
wherein his enemies are the true aggressors. Therefore, it
is said that such a chance comes, indeed, only to a lucky
few. That a king must fight on such an occasion is vividly
brought out in the Mahabharata.
AND REGARDING OTHER REASONS WHY THE
BATTLE SHOULD BE FOUGHT, THE LORD SAYS:
32. Happy indeed are the KSHATRIYAS, O Partha, who are
called to fight in such a battle, that comes of itself as an open-
door to heaven.
As used here, Kshatriya is not the name of a caste. It
merely indicates a certain quality of the mental vasanas in
the individual. Those who have an ever-bubbling
enthusiasm to defend the weak and the poor, besides their
own national culture from all threats of aggression, are
called Kshatriyas. Such leaders of men are not allowed to
be tyrants and aggressors themselves, according to the
code of morality of the Hindus. But, at the same time, a
cold, feminine and cowardly non-resistance is not the
spirit of the Hindu tradition. In all cases where the Hindu
nation is forced to wage a war on principles of
righteousness (Upapannam) the leaders of India are
103
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ordered to fight in defence of their culture and to consider
themselves fortunate to get the chance to serve the
country. Such battle-fields are the wide-open gates to
Heaven for the defending heroes who fight diligently on
the side of Dharma.
It is interesting to note how Lord Krishna, in the scheme
of his exhortations, comes down slowly from the highest
pinnacles of Vedantic ideologies to the lower plane of
material philosophy, and still lower down to the point-of-
view of an average worldly man. From all these different
levels, he views the problem and presents Arjuna with the
same logical conclusion that the war must be fought.
IT IS INDEED A FACT THAT IT IS YOUR DUTY, AND
NOW IN CASE YOU RENOUNCE IT AND RUN AWAY
FROM THE BATTLE-FIELD, THEN:
33. But, if you will not fight this righteous war, then, having
abandoned your own duty and fame, you shall incur sin.
In case you refuse to engage yourself in this glorious war,
then not only will you be renouncing your own "personal
call-of-character" (Swadharma) and honour, in not having
fulfilled your noble duty, but also incur positive sin. Not
to face this army of un-Aryan forces is as much sinful as to
murder and kill those who deserve not such a treatment.
104
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Dharma, we have already explained, is the 'law of being.'
Every living creature has taken up its form and has come
into the world of objects for one great purpose, which is to
gain an exhaustion of its existing mental impressions. The
bundle of vasanas with which an individual has arrived
into a particular incarnation is called his, "personal call-of-
character" (Swadharma). When classified thus, Arjuna falls
under the group of the 'kingly' (Kshatriya), who are
characterised by adventurous heroism and an insatiable
thirst for honour and fame.
Not to make use of the evolutionary chances provided by
life is to reject and refuse the chances provided for a
vasana CATHARSIS. By not exhausting the old vasanas,
one will be living under a high vasana-pressure when the
existing tendencies are crowded out by the influx of new
tendencies. Not fighting the war, Arjuna may run away
from the field, but he will certainly come to regret his lost
chances, since his mind is so composed that he can find
complete relief and solace only by living the intensely
dangerous life of the battle-field. A boy with tendencies
for art cannot be successfully trained to become a
businessman, or an economist, since these are contrary to
his nature. If an over-anxious parent, in the name of love,
projects upon a growing child, his own intentions and
plans, we invariably find that the young boy will have a
crushed personality.
Examples of this type are seen everywhere in the world,
especially so in the spiritual field. There are many seekers
105
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
with over-enthusiasm for spiritual development, who, at
the mere appearance of a misery, or at the threat of a
sorrow, decide to run away into the jungles 'seeking God,'
and they, invariably, end in a life-long tragic disaster.
They have in them sensuous vasanas which can be
satisfied only in the embrace of a family under the roof of
their own tenement, but rejecting them all, they reach the
Himalayan caves and then, all the day through, they can
neither meditate upon the Lord, nor find a field for
sensuous enjoyment. Naturally, they entertain more and
more agitations in their minds, otherwise called sin (papa).
Sin in Hinduism is "a mistake of the mind in which it acts
contrary to its essential nature as the Self." Any act of
sensuousness which the mind pants for in the world-of-
objects, hoping to get thereby a joy and satisfaction,
creates necessarily within itself more and more agitations
and this type of a mistake of the mind is called a sin.
CONTINUING, NOT ONLY WILL YOU HAVE GIVEN
UP YOUR DUTY AND FAME BUT ALSO:
34. People too, will recount your everlasting dishonour; and to
one who has been honoured, dishonour is more than death.
To a famous hero, dishonour is worse than death. This is
another argument that Krishna brings forth, to persuade
his friend to give up his hesitation in fighting the great
war. The general import is that, if Arjuna were to abandon
106
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the fight, he could do so only because of his cowardice,
since, the cause of the war is righteous. Certainly, there is
an under-current of sympathy in Krishna's words: he
realises that, however great a hero Arjuna might be, even
he could be weakened by wrong emotionalism.
MOREOVER:
35. The great battalion commanders will think that you have
withdrawn from the battle through fear; and you will be looked
down upon by them who had thought much of you and your
heroism in the past.
Continuing the common-man's-point-of-view arguments,
Krishna says here that not only will the world blame him
and history recount his infamy, but immediately also, the
great warriors and battalion commanders (Maharathas) in
the enemy lines will start ridiculing him. They will laugh
and say that the great archer Arjuna ran away from the
battle-front because of sheer cowardice. They will
interpret his conscientious objections against the
fratricidal war as an act of cowardice of a hero during a
weak moment in his life. No soldier can stand such a
dishonour, especially when it comes from one's own
equals among enemy lines.
MOREOVER:
107
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
36. And many unspeakable words will your enemies speak
cavilling about your powers. What can be more painful than
this?
Finding that Arjuna is conspicuously reacting well to
these arguments, Krishna drives home to him the folly of
running away from the battle-front. It will be intolerable
when his enemies scandalize his glorious name and his
chivalry in foul language, too indecent even for words.
Not only will history record for all times his cowardly
retreat but even while he lives, he will be pointed out and
laughed at as a 'hero' who ran away from the battle-field.
37. Slain, you will obtain heaven; victorious you will enjoy the
earth; therefore, stand up, O son of Kunti, determined to fight.
In case he has to give up his life on the war-front, fighting
for such a noble cause, he shall, certainly, enter the
'Heaven of the Heroes' (Veera-swarga) to stay and to enjoy
there for aeons. In case he wins, he shall certainly come to
rule over the kingdom and enjoy in the world, and
thereafter also he shall go to Heaven to enjoy there the
status of a mighty hero who fought championing the
cause of Dharma. Either way he will gain because he was
on the side of the good --- the war aims of the Pandavas
being stoutly righteous.
Therefore --- meaning, for all the reasons so far
enumerated, "Arise, resolved to fight." Earlier, Arjuna,
after expressing his feelings of grief and despair had sat
108
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
inert and motionless throwing down his weapons.
Krishna asks his friend to come out of this moodiness and
dejection, "determined to fight" the noble war.
The call to war is justified because of the particular
situation in the Mahabharata where the Geeta was given
out. Generalising the call of Krishna, we may say that it is
a divine call to Man to discard his melancholy dejections
in the face of life's challenges and to come forward to play
as best as he can "the game of life" with a firm
determination to strive and to win. In this line, we have
the universality of the Geeta explicitly brought out for
those who understand it and find its vast application to
the community of man.
NOW LISTEN TO THE ADVICE I OFFER YOU ON
YOUR INNER ATTITUDE WHILE YOU FIGHT THE
BATTLE:
38. Having made --- pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory
and defeat --- the same, engage in battle for the sake of battle;
thus you shall not incur sin.
From this stanza onwards we have a slight hint about the
technique of Karma Yoga as explained in the Geeta. In the
introduction we have stated that the second chapter is
almost a summary of the whole Geeta; later on, we shall
see how the Path of Devotion also is, in brief, indicated in
this very chapter.
109
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In this stanza we have Krishna's first direct statement on
the technique of Self-Perfection and, as such, a very
careful study of it will be extremely fruitful to all students
of the Geeta.
The three pairs of opposites mentioned here are distinct
experiences at the three levels of our mortal existence.
PAIN AND PLEASURE are the "intellectual" awareness of
experiences unfavourable and favourable; GAIN AND
LOSS conceptions indicate the "mental" zone where we
feel the joys of meeting and the sorrows of parting; and
CONQUEST AND DEFEAT indicate the "physical" fields
wherein at the level of the body, we ourselves win or let
others win. The advice that Krishna gives is that one must
learn to keep oneself in equilibrium in all these different
vicissitudes at the respective levels of existence.
If one were to enter the sea for a bath, one must know the
art of sea-bathing or else the incessant waves will play
rough on the person, and may even sweep him off his feet
and drag him to a watery grave. But he who knows the art
of saving himself --- by ducking beneath the mighty
waves, or by riding over the lesser ones --- he alone can
enjoy a sea-bath. To hope all the waves to end, or to expect
the waves not to trouble one while one is in the sea is to
order the sea to be something other than itself for one's
convenience! This is exactly what a foolish man does in
life. He expects life to be without waves --- but life is ever
full of waves. Pain and pleasure, gain and loss, conquest
110
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and defeat must arise in the waters of life or else it is
complete stagnation --- it is almost death.
If life be thus a tossing stormy sea at all times, and it
should be so, then we, who have entered life, must know
the art of living it, unaffected either by the rising crests, or
by the sinking hollows in it. To identify ourselves with
any of them is to be tossed about on the surface, and not to
stand astride like a light-house, which has its foundations
built on the bed-rock of the very sea. Here Krishna advises
Arjuna, while inviting him to fight, that he should enter
the contest and keep himself unaffected by the usual
dissipasting mental tendencies that come to everyone,
while in activity. This equanimity of the mind alone can
bring out the beam of inspiration, and give to one's
achievements the glow of a real success.
It is very well-known that in all activities, inspired work
gathers to itself a texture of divine perfection which
cannot be imitated or oft-repeated. Be he a poet, or an
artist, a doctor or a speaker, irrespective of his profession,
whenever an individual is at his best, his master-piece is
always accepted by all as a 'work of inspiration.' When we
thus work with the thrilled ecstasy of an unknown mood
called 'inspiration,' the ideas, thoughts and activity that
come out of us have a ringing beauty of their own, which
cannot be otherwise mechanically repeated by us. Thus,
Da Vinci could not repeat for a second time and copy on
another piece of canvas the enigmatic smile of his Mona
Lisa; Keats' pen could no more re-capture for a second
111
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
time the song of the Nightingale in its flight; Beethoven
could never again beat out of his faithful piano a second
Moonlight Sonata; Lord Krishna himself, after the war,
when requested by Arjuna to repeat the Geeta, admitted
his inability to do so!!
To the Western mind and understanding, 'inspiration' is
an accidental and mysterious happening over which the
mortal has no control at all, while to the eastern Rishis,
inspired living is the real godly destiny of man, when he
lives in perfect unison with the Self within him. A
balanced life, wherein we live as unaffected witnesses of
even our own mind and intellect, is the realm of self-
forgetfulness, where, instead of becoming inefficient, our
profession gathers the scintillating glow of a new dawn.
This extra aura in any achievement is that which raises an
ordinary success to an 'inspired achievement. '
The Yogis of ancient Hindu-lore discovered a technique,
whereby the mind and intellect could be consciously
brought to a steadiness and poise, and this technique is
called Yoga. The Hindus of the Vedic period knew it,
practised it, lived it; and with their incomparable
achievements, they provided, for their country, the golden
era of the Hindus.
The philosophy of a country like India, in the Vedic period,
must necessarily be Theistic, but it has its applications in
all walks of life. If it fails in its all-round application, it
cannot be a philosophy. A theory of life which has no
112
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
universal application, can at best, be appreciated as the
noble opinion of an individual, which may have its own
limited application, but it can never be accepted as a
philosophy.
In the entire scheme of Bhagawan's arguments so far, he
has provided Arjuna with all the necessary reasons which
a healthy intellect should discover for itself, before it
comes to a reliable and dependable judgement upon the
outer happenings. A mere spiritual consideration should
not be the last word in the evaluation of all material
situations. Every challenge should be estimated from the
spiritual stand-point, as well as from the intellectual
stand-point of reason, from the emotional level of ethics
and morality, and from the physical level of tradition and
custom. If all these considerations, without any
contradiction, indicate a solitary truth, then that is surely
the Divine Path that one should, at all costs, pursue.
Arjuna came to the delusory mis-calculation of the
situation because he evaluated the war only from the level
of his sentiments. The opposing forces were teeming with
his own relations and to kill and exterminate them was
indeed against the ethical point-of-view. But, this
emotionalism overpowered him, and at this moment of
his total inward chaos, he completely lost sight of the
other considerations that would have helped him to
regain his balance. He surrendered, as a mind should, to
Krishna, the inner discriminative capacity. Therefore, the
Lord, having undertaken to guide Arjuna, provides him
113
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
with all the available data gathered from different points
of view. Throughout the Geeta, Krishna plays the part of
the "discriminative intellect" in an individual, a true
charioteer in the Upanishad-sense of the term.
After thus placing all the possible points of view upon the
problem --- the spiritual, the intellectual, the ethical and
the traditional for Arjuna's consideration --- Krishna
concludes in the earlier stanza that Arjuna must fight. In
this stanza Krishna tries to explain how he should conduct
himself in this undertaking. It has been said that he should
fight the war with perfect detachment from all anxieties
which generally come to an individual, when he identifies
himself with the non-Self (Anatma) --- at the level of his
intellect with the concept of pain and pleasure, at the level
of his mind with the fears of gain and loss and at his body-
level with the restlessness of conquest and defeat.
Equanimity in all such mental challenges is a factor that
ensures true success in life. We have explained earlier how
the human mind is to be kept open, while working in its
given field of life, so that, while living in the midst of life's
battle, it can exhaust the vasanas that are already in it. This
purgation --- catharsis of the Soul --- is the compelling
purpose for which every living creature has arrived on the
platform of manifested life. Viewed thus, each individual
living creature --- plant, animal or man --- is but a bundle
of vasanas.
114
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The equanimity in the face of all situations, advised here,
is the secret method of keeping the mind ever open for its
outflow. When it gets clouded by the ego-sense and the
egoistic desires, then the out-flow is choked, and new
tendencies start flooding in. The ego is born when an
individual starts getting upset at all these pairs-of-
opposites (Dwandwas) such as joy and sorrow, etc. The
attempt to keep equanimous is successful, only if action is
detached from the ego. Thus, mental purification ---
vasana-catharsis --- is the benign result of real living and
right action: and this is Yoga. This is explained, in the next
chapter of the Geeta, in all detail as Karma Yoga.
The philosophical theory of truth was described in the
very opening of the Lord's message, and, in order to drive
home those conclusions into the practical-mind of a man-
of-action, Arjuna, Lord Krishna gave arguments from the
stand-point of the common man. Ultimately, he concluded
that Arjuna must fight and explained in what attitude he
should fight. Practical religion consists in living the
philosophy one has understood.
HEREAFTER, THE SCHEME OF THE GEETA IN THE
CHAPTER IS TO EXPLAIN THE TECHNIQUES OF
LIVING THE VEDANTIC PHILOSOPHY, IN AND
THROUGH KARMA YOGA. HENCE SAYS THE LORD:
39. This, which has been taught to thee, is wisdom concerning
SANKHYA. Now listen to the wisdom concerning YOGA,
115
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
having known which, O Partha, you shall cast off the bonds-of-
action.
What is so far taught consists of the "Sankhya," meaning,
"the logic of reasoning by which the true nature of the
Absolute Reality is comprehended," which can end for
you all sorrows arising from grief, attachment and the
like. Krishna promises that hereafter he will try to explain
the technique of attaining the wisdom (Buddhi), which is
otherwise called Buddhi yoga --- "devotion through work."
FRUITS OF ACTION (Karma-phala) --- The Law-of-Karma,
which is often misunderstood as the Law-of-Destiny,
forms a cardinal creed of the Hindus and a right
understanding of it is absolutely essential to all students
of the Hindu Way-of-Life. If I am, now, justly punished, in
Delhi, for a crime committed last year by Sri Ramana Rao
in Madras then, certainly there must be something
common between the criminal Ramana Rao THEN in
Madras and the saintly Chinmaya NOW in Delhi! The
long arm of the law of the country discovering the identity
of Ramana Rao in Chinmaya must have slowly crept from
Madras to Delhi and ultimately booked the "Swami" for
the crime of Rao, that he was!!
Similarly, nature's justice is always perfect and, therefore,
if the Hindu philosophers accept that each of us
individually suffers because of our crimes committed in
another form, and in a different locality, at a different
period of time in the past, certainly, there must be some
116
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
identity between the SINNER IN THE PAST and the
SUFFERER IN THE PRESENT. This identity, the Shastra
says, is the mind-and-intellect-equipment in each one of
us.
Each act, willfully performed, leaves an impression upon
the mind of the actor according to the texture of the
motive entertained. In order to work out and remove
these impressions --- vasanas-catharsis --- each individual
arrives at his specific field of activity in life. Sin-
impressions in the mind can be wiped away only with the
waters of tears, acting upon the mind, in an atmosphere of
sobs and sighs. Thus, every one gets his quota of chances
to weep, which, in many cases, comes to be discovered,
later on, as not so sorrowful, after all. A mind which has
thus been completely purified, fails to see a situation
really worth weeping for. Weeping, in fact, is not ordered
by the circumstances, but by the "papa-tendencies" in the
mind of the miserable.
Merely because there is a record in my gramophone box, I
will have no music. Even when it is placed on its disc and
revolved at the required speed, it will not and cannot sing.
Music can come out of it only when the needle is in
contact with it. The unmanifest music in the disc can be
brought to expression only through the sound-box.
Similarly, here, the mental impressions cannot in
themselves bring either disaster or reward unless they are
connected with the external world through the needle-
point of our ego-centric self-assertion.
117
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
One who lives, as we found in the earlier verse, in perfect
equanimity in all conditions, must necessarily come to live
in a realm of his own, away from the pleasure and pain of
the INTELLECT, the sobs of success and failure of the
MIND, and the fears of loss and gain in the FLESH. To the
degree an individual detaches himself from his own body,
mind and intellect, to that degree his ego is dead, and,
therefore, since the "sufferer" is no longer available, there
cannot be any more "fruits-of-action" for him to suffer.
Rightly understood, we shall realise, during our
discussions on this chapter, how this Theory of Krishna
has not the novelty of an original idea. The more
intimately we understand it, the more we shall realise that
Krishna has but given a new vesture to an ancient idea.
But due to this re-statement in the Geeta, of a cardinal
truth of ancient Hinduism, a religion that was dying
revived itself. And from the days of its origin, five
thousand years before Christ was born, it is beckoning us
today, even two thousand years after the Nazarene's
death.
MOREOVER:
40. In this there is no loss of effort, nor is there any harm
(production of contrary results) . Even a little of this knowledge,
even a little practice of the YOGA, protects one from the great
fear.
118
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Unfinished ritualistic acts will yield no fruits just as
ploughing and sowing are not fulfilled, if the sequence of
actions --- as ploughing, watering, sowing, weeding,
guarding, harvesting, etc., are not kept up exactly in that
order. Similarly, some ritualistic acts, when they are not
performed faithfully, following all the strict injunctions,
the chances are that the very same meritorious acts might
result in sins, accrued through the non-performance, or
imperfect performance, of enjoined acts. This sin is called,
in the language of ritualistic literature, a 'Pratyavaya.' In
the material world also, we can find corresponding
instances wherein a medicine misused may bring about a
calamitous end for the patient.
These two are the dangers in the field of activities by
which we are cheated of all our expected results. Krishna
here, as a pukka publicity agent for his own philosophy,
vigorously asserts that his "Technique of Action," Karma
Yoga, guarantees safety from these two main dangers.
THE WISDOM CONCERNING SANKHYA AND YOGA
THUS FAR DESCRIBED IS OF THE FOLLOWING
NATURE:
41. Here, O Joy of the Kurus, Kurunandana, there is but a
single-pointed determination; many-branched and endless are
the thoughts of the irresolute.
In Karma Yoga, which the Lord is now explaining, even the
highest achievement of Self-realisation is possible because,
119
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
there, the man works with one resolute determination,
with a single-pointed mind. Those who perform actions,
labouring under endless desires for results, get their inner
personality disintegrated, and with a shattered, thousand-
pronged mind, they are not able, consistently, to apply
themselves to any line of action; therefore, their
endeavours invariably end in disastrous failure.
In this stanza lies the secret of Hindu success --- briefly
hinted at in hasty words herein. With a single-pointed
mind, if an individual can entertain any single resolute-
determination and act consistently towards its success,
achievement must certainly result. But invariably, man,
victimised by his ego, entertains hundreds of desires,
often mutually contradictory, and therefore, comes to play
upon these fields with an impoverished and exhausted
mental strength. This is, psychologically, what we call
"self-cancellation of thoughts." When this comes to plague
the mental zone, it exhausts all the potentialities of man
and loots away all his chances of success.
42. Flowery speech is uttered by the unwise, taking pleasure in
the eulogising words of VEDAS, O Partha, saying, "There is
nothing else. "
43. Full of desires, having heaven as their goal, they utter
flowery words, which promise new birth as the reward of their
actions, and prescribe various specific actions for the attainment
of pleasure and Lordship.
120
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
44. For, those who cling to joy and Lordship, whose minds are
drawn away by such teaching, are neither determinate and
resolute nor are they fit for steady meditation and SAMADHI.
Vyasa was one of the first daring revolutionaries in
Hinduism who ever came up to win back the Hindu
culture from the decadence it had fallen into, in his time.
The Bible of the Revolution that he created was the Geeta.
His vigorous criticism is reflected in the words of Krishna
when he characterises the ritualistic portion of the Vedas as
"the flowery words of the unwise." We have to live
mentally in the orthodox atmosphere of that age to
appreciate the daring with which Vyasa then had put up
this criticism so strongly.
The ritualistic sections of the Vedas address those who are
deeply attached to pleasure and power, whose
discriminative power --- the capacity to distinguish the
Real from the Unreal --- is stolen away from them, for they
are concerned about the results and rewards of Karma.
They were involved in the ritualism as such; not
concerned with the Higher, to reach which these are but
the means.
These Karmas, which promised the performer a POST-
MORTEM heavenly existence, with supra-sensuous carnal
pleasures, are to be undertaken and laboriously pursued.
In all these activities man's inner personality has no time
or chance to get integrated and evolved, and, therefore,
from the spiritual stand-point, Vyasa feels that they are
121
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
methods of impotent religion. The ritualist gets involved
in the means, without aspiring for the Real Goal!
Thus, as an expounder of the TRANSCENDENTAL and
the INFINITE, Krishna is here laughing at those who
mistake the means for the end; the ritualistic portion is the
means and the Vedantic portion dealing with realisation
through meditation is the end. The Karma Kanda prepares
the mind to a single-pointedness, when it is pursued
without specific desires (Nishkama), and such a prepared
mind alone is fit for steady contemplation over the
Upanishadic declarations.
The passage is concluded with the declaration that such
persons, tossed about by their desires, shall never discover
and experience of tranquillity in their inner life.
THE LORD NOW SPEAKS OF THE RESULT ACCRUING
TO THOSE LUSTFUL PERSONS WHO ARE THUS
WANTING IN DISCRIMINATION:
45. The VEDAS deal with the three attributes; be you above
these three attributes (GUNAS) , O Arjuna, free yourself from
the pairs-of-opposites, and ever remain in the SATTWA
(goodness) , freed from all thoughts of acquisition and
preservation, and be established in the Self.
The three inseparable gunas always remain in the inner
constitution of every living creature, in varying
proportions. The mind and intellect are constituted of this
122
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
triple-stuff. To go beyond these three temperaments is
literally to go beyond the mind. If there is an alloy
constituted of copper, zinc, and tin, and a pot is made of
that alloy, then to remove all tin, zinc and copper from the
pot is to destroy the pot completely. Tea is made of hot
water, tea leaves, sugar and milk; and from a cup of tea if
you are asked to remove these four components of tea, it
amounts to saying 'empty the cup.' In the direct language
of the Upanishads, man has been advised to transcend the
mind and intellect, and they promise that the individual
shall thereby re-discover himself to be God. This direct
explanation came to frighten away the Hindu folk out of
the Aryan-fold, and so the CALL OF THE RENAISSANCE
here, though meaning the same, puts it in different words
when it says: "Arjuna, transcend the gunas."
If a doctor were to prescribe a medicine which is nowhere
in the catalogue of any pharmaceutical company in the
world, and, naturally, therefore, not available in any
bazaar, that prescription is certainly useless. Similarly, it
may be a great prescription for Self-perfection when the
Lord advises: "Be free from the triad of the gunas," but it is
useless unless a student, practical-minded and
adventurous enough to try to live this advice, can be
instructed as to how he can go beyond these instinctive
temperaments in man, viz., unactivity (Sattwa), activity
(Rajas) and inactivity (Tamas).
The second line in the stanza gives us a very practical and
direct method of transporting ourselves from the realm of
123
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
imperfection to the boundless regions of Bliss and
Beatitude. Earlier, Krishna had indicated how Arjuna
should enter the field and wage the war. The same mental
equanimity is being advised here in a different language.
Pairs-of-opposites are the experiences in our life such as
joy and sorrow, health and disease, success and failure,
heat and cold, etc. Each one of them can be experienced
and known only with reference to and as a contrast to its
opposite. Therefore the term 'pairs-of-opposites'
(Dwandwas) envisages, in its comprehensive meaning, all
the experiences of man in life. Krishna advises Arjuna to
be free from all pairs-of-opposites (Dwandwas).
NITYA-SATTWA-STHAH --- "Ever established in purity."
The purity, Sattwa, the subtlest of the three gunas, often
becomes impure by its contact with attachments and the
consequent agitations (Rajas) that attack the intellect with
delusion and grief, and veil it from the right cognition of
the Real Nature of things (Tamas). To be established in
purity (Sattwa) would, therefore, mean keeping ourselves
least agitated, and so, least deluded in our perceptions of
things and beings, and in our estimation of their true
nature.
Yoga and Kshema in their meaning include all the activities
of every living being in the universe. These are the two
urges which goad every one in all one's activities. 'Yoga'
means 'to acquire' for purposes of possessing; and
'Kshema' means 'all efforts at preserving the acquired.'
124
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Thus the two terms Yoga and Kshema encompass all our
ego-centric activities motivated by selfish desires to
acquire and, compelled by equally selfish wishes, to hoard
and preserve what has been acquired. To renounce these
two temperaments is to get away immediately from the
two main fields that yield the poisonous harvest of
extreme restlessness and sorrow in life.
It is very easy for a spiritual master to advise an aspirant
to be "free from the pairs-of-opposites, and remain ever
pure and free from the natural appetites for acquisition,
and the usual greed for preservation." But the philosophy
will be practical only when the seeker is advised as to
HOW he can do so. This 'how' of it all has been indicated
by the last word in the stanza: Atmavan --- "be established
in the Self." The persecutions of the pairs-of-opposites, the
instinct to be impure, the desire to possess and the anxiety
to preserve, all belong to the ego-centre, which is born
when the Self identifies with the body, mind and intellect,
and when the consequent ego suffers the pangs of
anxieties, pains and sorrows.
To detach ourselves from these by keeping a constant
sense of awareness of our pure Divine Nature is the Path
shown in the Geeta. Established in the Self, the individual-
ego, ever pure and free from all anxieties, finds itself
beyond the experiences of the world. Necessarily, he will
be trans-gunas. One who is beyond the gunas has no more
use for the Veda Text Books --- he is the Master, thereafter,
to amend the Vedas or to add to them; he is the Master
125
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
who shall give the Divine sanction for the very Vedic
declarations.
IF ALL THOSE ENDLESS PROFITS WHICH ARE SAID
TO RESULT FROM THE VEDIC RITUALS ARE NOT TO
BE SOUGHT AFTER, THEN TO WHAT END ARE THEY
TO BE PERFORMED AND DEDICATED TO ISWARA?
LISTEN TO WHAT FOLLOWS:
46. To the BRAHMANA who has known the Self, all the
VEDAS are of so much use, as is a reservoir of water in a place
where there is flood everywhere.
It is a wonderful simile that is used here, fully applicable
in the context in which it is used. So long as there is no
flood, everyone from the vicinity will have to reach the
well to collect drinking water, although everywhere there
is a vein of water running under our feet, but separated
from us by the crust of the earth. For the seeker, the Veda
is the only source of True Knowledge, and every one must
necessarily go to the Sacred Book for Knowledge. But
when the area is flooded and the wells and the tanks have
disappeared in the spread of the flood, at that time the
reservoir of water, which used to be of service, becomes
merged in the spread of water that lies all round.
Similarly, the Vedas, meaning here "the ritualistic portion,"
which promises fulfilment of the various desires, can be
useful only so long as the individual is riddled with
delusory desires for sensuous satisfactions. But, to a
126
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
sincere student and seeker (Brahmana) who has "come to
experience the Self" (Vijanatah) these ritualistic portions of
the Vedas become useless inasmuch as the benefits that
they can give are comprehended in the perfection that he
has come to live.
The Karma Kanda only prescribes rituals for the satisfaction
of desires whereby the individuals can gain some finite
joy, maybe here, or in the hereafter. Thus, on discovering
the Self in oneself, the seeker comes to experience the
infinite bliss of the Divine, and all the pleasures derived
from the performance of work enjoined in the Vedas are
comprehended in the Bliss, which the realised soul
experiences as the very Essence of his own Self. Everyone
must admit that all those limited "satisfactions" are
comprehended in the Infinite Bliss of the experience of the
Self.
This does not mean that Vyasa is ignoring or ridiculing
the Karma Kanda of the Vedas as such. The whip of the
Cowherd Boy is descending upon the bare backs of the
unintelligent, who have mistaken the means for the goal,
and who consider that through ritualism and its promised
joys, the Supreme or the Infinite can be gained. Karma,
when undertaken with no anxiety for the results,
integrates the personality; when a heart is thus purified, a
clearer discriminative power comes to play through it, and
in its light, Truth becomes self-evident. Having once
realised the Infinite-Self spreading out all round without
dimensions or frontiers, thereafter, the limited satisfaction
127
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
promised by ritualism has no more any charm for the
man-of-Knowledge, the Self-realised.
The Knowledge the Veda indicates is comprehended in
Pure Knowledge, which is the nature of the Self. So long
as the ego exists it craves for the blessings of the Vedas;
when the ego has ended, the Self, in Its Infinite Divinity is
capable of blessing even the Veda. A student of
mathematics, having successfully passed his post-
graduate course, need not read the arithmetic table, since
his greater knowledge comprehends this elementary
study.
AND AS FOR YOU:
47. Thy right is to work only, but never to its fruits; let not the
fruit-of-action be thy motive, nor let thy attachment be to
inaction.
The traditional belief of Hinduism has not at all been
shaken in the Geeta-theory that single-pointed, divine-
dedicated Karma, without desire for the fruits, shall bring
about inner purification, which is a condition precedent to
spiritual awakening. The Geeta only gives an exhaustive
exposition of this idea to incorporate in it ALL activities in
the social and personal life; while in the Vedas, Karma
meant only the religious and the ritualistic activities.
Philosophy is not a subject that can be rightly understood
by hasty students. The stanza now under review, when
128
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
not properly understood, would seem to indicate an
impossible method. At best, it would look as if it was a
religious sanction for the poor to continue to be poor and
a sacred permission for the rich to continue tyrannising
over the poor! To act in life "WITHOUT ANY
EXPECTATION OF RESULTS" would seem to be almost
impossible to one who is only trying to understand the
stanza mentally. But when the same individual, after his
studies, walks out into the open fields of life and tries to
practise it there, he shall discover that this alone is the
very secret of all real achievements.
Earlier, we have indicated how Krishna, through his
Karma Yoga, was showing "the art of living and acting" in a
spirit of Divine inspiration. Here also we shall find, as we
tussle with this idea in our attempt to digest it, that
Krishna is advising Arjuna on the secret-art of living an
inspired life.
Wrong imaginations are the banes of life, and all failures
in life can be directly traced to have risen from an
impoverished mental equanimity, generally created by
unintelligent entertainment of fears regarding possible
failures. Almost all of us refuse to undertake great
activities, being afraid of failures, and even those who
dare to undertake noble endeavours, invariably become
nervous ere they finish them, again, due to their inward
dissipastion. To avoid such wasteful expenditure of
mental energy and work with the best that is in us,
dedicated to the noble cause of the work undertaken, is
129
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the secret prescription for the noblest creative inspiration;
and, such work must always end in a brilliant success.
This is the eternal law-of-activity in the world.
The future is always carved out in the present.
Tomorrow's harvest depends upon today's ploughing and
sowing. But, in the fear of possible dangers to the crops, if
a farmer wastes his present chances of thoroughly
ploughing, and carefully sowing at the right time, it is
guaranteed that he shall not have any harvest at all. The
present moments are to be invested intelligently and well,
so that we may reap a better time in the future. The past is
dead; the future is not yet born. If one becomes unhealthy
and inefficient in the present, certainly he has no reason to
hope for a greater future.
This fundamental truth, very well-known and easily
comprehended by all, is, in the language of the Geeta, a
simple statement: "If success you seek, then never strive
with a mind dissipasted with anxieties and fears for the
fruits." In this connection it is very interesting to dissect
carefully and discover exactly what the Shastra means
when it says: "Fruits-of-action." In fact, the reward of an
action, when we understand it properly, is not anything
different from the action itself. An action in the PRESENT
itself, when conditioned by a FUTURE-time, appears as
the fruit-of-the-action. In fact, the action ends, or fulfils
itself, only in its reaction, and the reaction is not anything
different from the action; an action in the present, defined
in terms of a future moment, is its reaction. Therefore, to
130
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
worry over and get ourselves pre-occupied with the
anxieties for the rewards-of-actions is to escape from the
dynamic PRESENT and to live in a FUTURE that is not yet
born! In short, the Lord's advice here is a call to man not to
waste his present moment in fruitless dreams and fears,
but to bring his best --- all the best in him --- to the
PRESENT and vitally live every moment, the promise
being, that the future shall take care of itself, and shall
provide the Karma Yogin with the achievements divine
and accomplishments supreme.
In effect, therefore, Arjuna is advised: "All that is given to
you now is to act and, having known the cause of action to
be a noble one, to bring into the activity all that is best in
you and forget yourself in the activity. Such inspired
action is sure to bear fruit, and again, it has its own
reward-spiritual."
The stanza gives the four injunctions guiding us to be true
workers. A real Karma Yogin is one who understands: (a)
that his concern is with action alone; (b) that he has no
concern with results; (c) that he should not entertain the
motive of gaining a fixed fruit for a given action; and (d)
that these ideas do not mean that he should sit back
courting inaction. In short, the advice is to make the
worker release himself from all his mental pre-
occupastions, and thus through work make him live in the
joy and ecstasy of inspired self-forgetfulness. The work
itself is his reward; he gets himself drunk with the joy and
131
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
satisfaction of a noble work done. The work is the means;
the Higher Self-experience alone is the Goal-Divine.
By thus re-acting readily to all external challenges, with
his devoted attention upon Him, one can find peace easily,
and a bosom thus purged of its existing vasana-bondages
is, to that extent, considered better purified for the
purposes of meditation and the final Vedantic-realisation
of the Infinite glory of the Self.
IF A MAN SHOULD NOT PERFORM WORK
PROMPTED BY DESIRES FOR THEIR RESULT, HOW
THEN SHOULD HE PERFORM IT? THE REPLY
FOLLOWS:
48. Perform action, O Dhananjaya, abandoning attachment,
being steadfast in YOGA, and balanced in success and failure.
Evenness of mind is called YOGA.
From this stanza onwards we have an exhaustive
discussion of the technique of Karma Yoga as conceived by
Krishna in his Doctrine of Action and expounded in
Vyasa's Geeta. A complete technique of how one can live
the life of a truly inspired worker is explained here, and,
to any careful student, who understands all the
implications of the terms, it must be clear that a complete
effacement of the ego and its vanities is to be achieved to
succeed in this Path; and this is gained by practising the
equipoise mentioned in the previous stanzas.
132
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In this stanza, for the first time, the term Yoga has been
used in the sense of the "evenness of mind" through work,
and before it concludes, we also get an exhaustive
definition of the term Yoga as used in the stanza.
"Evenness of mind," the tranquillity of mental composure,
in facing all pairs-of-opposites is defined here as Yoga.
Defined thus, the term Yoga, indicates a special condition
of the mind in which it comes to a neutral equilibrium in
all the ebb and flow of life's tides. The instructions in the
stanza advise us that desireless action can be performed
only when one gets completely established in Yoga; here
the terms precisely paint what Vyasa's definition means.
Not only is it sufficient that a true worker should act in the
world, established in equipoise and equanimity, but he
should, amidst the changes of the world, also reinforce
this poise, through a renunciation of his "attachment"
(Sanga) to the immediate fruits of his actions.
We shall try to enquire into the "attachment," mentioned
here, which a seeker should renounce, so that he may
become more efficient in performing inspired activities. To
all sincere students, who have so far followed the Lord's
words, it should be clear that "attachment" here means all
factors against which Krishna has already warned us in
the earlier stanzas and insisted that we must renounce
them all --- viz., wrong imaginations, false expectations,
day-dreams about the fruits of actions, anxieties for the
results, and fears for future calamities that have not yet
133
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
appeared to threaten our lives. When it is put thus as a list
of mistakes to be avoided, any true Karma Yogin, striving
upon the Path of Yoga, will find it impossible to practise it.
But when we analyse this further with our understanding
of the Upanishads, we can easily solve the riddle.
All the above nerve-racking mistakes belong to the
delusory ego-centre. When we analyse closely the stuff of
which the ego is made we can easily find that it is a
bundle of 'MEMORIES OF THE PAST AND HOPES AND
EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FUTURE.' The dead moments,
that are no more, constitute the past. The future is unborn,
and does not yet belong to us. To live in the ego, therefore,
is to live either in the burial grounds of dead moments, or
in the womb of time where the unborn future now rests.
In all these pre-occupastions, we lose the immediate
moments given to us to act, to strive, to earn, and to
achieve. It is this unintelligent squandering of the wealth
of present chances, through our broodings and
imaginations, that is hinted at here by the genius of Vyasa
when he says, "Act, established in equanimity,
abandoning attachment."
Thus, in complete self-forgetfulness, to get intoxicated
with the activities undertaken in the present, is to live
vitally, fully and entirely with all the best that is in us. To
dissolve ourselves thus --- our past, our future, our hopes,
our fears --- into the fiery contents of the PRESENT is to
work in inspiration. And inspired work ever promises the
greatest returns.
134
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
An artist, who is at work, forgetting himself in the very
ecstasy of his work, is an example. One need not, for that
matter, be a great artist even. One who is working
interestedly with all his mind and intellect on any piece of
work will not be aware, immediately, of any chance
intruder. It will take time for the artist to come down from
the realms of his joyous mood to the crystallisation of the
ego in him to recognise the intruder, understand his
enquiry and give him an intelligent answer. In all inspired
activity, the worker forgets himself in the work that he is
doing.
In all such activities, when the worker has gained almost a
self-forgetfulness, he will not care for the success or failure
of his activity because, to worry for the results is to worry
for the future, and to live in the future is not to live in the
present. Inspiration is the joyous content of thrilled
ecstasy of each immediate moment. It is said that this
content of a moment in itself is "the entire Infinite Bliss."
"Established thus in equanimity, renouncing all ego-
centric-attachments, forgetting to worry over the results of
success or failure in the activities, act on," --- says, in effect,
Krishna to Arjuna; and he adds that the great Yoga is to
work thus with equipoise in all situations.
IN COMPARISON WITH ACTION THUS PERFORMED
WITH EVENNESS OF MIND, KRISHNA DECLARES:
135
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
49. Far lower than the YOGA -of-wisdom is action, O
Dhananjaya. Seek thou refuge in wisdom; wretched are they
whose motive is the "fruit. "
Work done with a mind undisturbed by anxieties for the
results is indeed superior to the work done by a
dissipasted mind, ever worrying over the results. Here the
term, "Buddhi yoga" has tickled some commentators to
discover in it a special Yoga advised by the Geeta. I
personally think that it is too much of a laboured theory.
Buddhi as defined in the Upanishads, is the determining
factor in the "inner-equipment"; Nishchyatmika is 'intellect';
Samshayatmika is 'mind'. Thus, when the thoughtflow is in
a state of flux and agitated, it is called the 'mind'; and
when it is single-pointed, calm and serene in its own
determination, it is called the 'intellect.' Thus, Buddhi yoga
means "to be established in the devotion to the intellect."
Steady in your conviction, your mind perfectly under the
control of your discriminative intellect, to live thus as a
master of your inner and outer world is called Buddhi yoga.
In Buddhi yoga we pursue our duties in life, without ever
losing sight of our ultimate Goal in Life.
Analysing the meaning of the stanza in terms of what we
have already seen regarding the split-personality and its
cure through Vasana-purgation, we may interpret Buddhi
yoga as an individual's attempt to live and act from the
zone of the intellect which freely controls the mind's
functions, and readily receives faithful obedience from the
mind. The attempt of the mind to work in union with the
136
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellect --- the "objective-mind" working under the control
and the order of the "subjective-mind" --- is called Buddhi
yoga. By so doing, instead of incurring more and more
liabilities of new Vasana-bondages, the individual gains a
release from the mental congestion created by the existing
Vasanas. Thus, when an individual completely surrenders
his ego, he is said to be "Established in Buddhi yoga."
Hence it is said "SEEK REFUGE IN Buddhi," meaning: "let
your mind be perfectly under the control and direction of
the intellect."
There is a solid reason why we should live under the
control of the intellect. Those who live in the mental zone,
tossed about by the mind's tribulations, get agitated by
anxiety for the fruits-of-actions. Such people are termed
here as 'wretched. ' It is a powerful statement by which
Vyasa condemns such thoughtless, unintelligent people:
"WRETCHED ARE THEY WHO ACT FOR THE
RESULTS." Understood properly, this is a wonderful
guidance by following which we can totally eliminate all
failures in life. Efficient activity in the present alone can
order great results.
They are "wretched" because they will be, in their desire-
prompted activities, incurring new Vasanas and thus will
be thickening the veil of ignorance of their own glorious
Divinity. Unselfish work, performed in a spirit of
dedication and ego-less surrender, is the secret method of
exhausting our Vasana-store. Such a mind alone, purged
137
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
clean, can reflect the Self clearly and come to discover the
Eternal God-hood.
NOW, LEARN WHAT RESULTS HE GAINS WHO
PERFORMS HIS DUTY WITH EVENNESS-OF-MIND:
50. Endowed with the Wisdom of evenness-of-mind, one casts
off in this life both good deeds and evil deeds; therefore, devote
yourself to YOGA, Skill in action is YOGA.
One who has an evenness of temper accomplished by his
perfect withdrawal from the realm of sentiments and
emotions, and who is established in his resolute intellect,
gets himself transported from the arena of both the good
and the bad, merit and de-merit. The conception of good
and bad is essentially of the mind, and the reactions of
merit and de-merit are left on the mental composition in
the form of Vasanas or samskaras. He, who is not
identifying with the stormy sea of the mind, will not be
thrown up or sunk down by the huge waves of Vasanas.
This idea is explained here by the term Buddhi yuktah: one
whose actions are all guided by his clear vision of his
higher and diviner Goal.
The Geeta, throughout this section, is sincerely calling
upon man not to live on the outskirts of his personality,
which are constituted of the worlds of sense-objects, the
physical body and the mind, but to enter into the realm of
the intellect, and from there to assert his natural
manliness. Man is the supreme creature in the kingdom of
138
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the living, because of the rational capacities of his
discriminative intellect. As long as man does not utilise
this special equipment in him, so long he cannot claim his
heritage as man.
Arjuna was asked by Krishna not to be a vain and
hysterical person, but to be a he-man and, therefore, ever a
master of all his external situations. The great hero,
Arjuna, became so frail and weak because he started living
in delusory identification with the sense of his own
physical security and with his various emotional
attachments.
He who lives constantly asserting his full evolutionary
status as man, becomes free from the chains and bondages
of all his past impressions (vasanas), which he must have
gathered in his pilgrimage through his different
embodiments.
"Therefore, apply yourself," advises Krishna, "to the
devotion of action, Yoga." In this context, again, Vyasa is
giving a definition of Yoga, as he means it here. Earlier, he
had already explained that "Evenness of mind is Yoga."
Now he re-writes the same definition more
comprehensively and says, "Yoga is dexterity in action."
In a science-book, if the very same term is defined
differently in every chapter, it would bring about
confusion in its understanding. How is it then that in the
Science of Religion, we find different definitions of the
139
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
same term? This riddle solves itself as soon as we carefully
attempt an intimate understanding of the definition. The
earlier definition is being incorporated in the latter one,
because, otherwise, "evenness of mind is Yoga" may be
misunderstood as a mere 'evenness of mind' producing
inaction and slothfulness. In this definition such a
misunderstanding is completely removed, and thus Karma
Yoga, as indicated in the all-comprehensive meaning
implied herein, indicates the art of working with perfect
mental equilibrium in all the different conditions
indicated by the term "pairs-of-opposites" (Dwandwas).
After dissecting this stanza thus, we come to understand
what exactly is the Lord's intention. When Yoga, "the art of
working without desire," is pursued, the Karma Yogin
becomes detached from all the existing vasanas in himself,
both good and bad. The vasana-pressure in the individual
causes restlessness within. The inner-equipment that has
become peaceful and serene is called the pure Antah-
Karana, which is an unavoidable prerequisite for
consistent, discriminative self-application in meditation.
Thus all actions, when properly pursued, become means
for the ultimate end of realising the Self through
meditation, with a pure mind.
We have here yet another example of Vyasa using the
frightening word Yoga in a tamer context in order to make
his society then feel at ease with it.
140
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
WHY SHOULD WE CULTIVATE THIS EVENNESS OF
MIND AND CONSEQUENTLY AN EXTRA DEXTERITY
IN ACTION?
51. The wise, possessed of knowledge, having abandoned the
fruits of their actions, freed from the fetters of birth, go to the
State which is beyond all evil.
Being a man of action, extremely intelligent, and having
not yet developed any blind faith in Lord Krishna's divine
potentialities, Arjuna still questions mentally, and the
Lord, anticipasting his doubt, explains here why a man of
true devotion to work should act, and with perfect
evenness of mind strive to achieve. The wise, meaning
those who know the art of true living, undertake all work,
maintaining in themselves the full evenness of mind, and
thus abandon all anxieties for the fruits of their actions.
These two conditions, under which the wise work, bring
out fully the picture of an individual who acts renouncing
both ego and ego-motivated desires.
By identifying with the agitations of the mind, the ego is
born, and, the ego so born gets riddled with desires as it
gets anxious for the fruits-of-its actions. When one works
with neither ego nor desires, one achieves vasana-
purgation; this is possible only when one always has the
Higher Goal in view.
141
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
52. When your intellect crosses beyond the mire of delusion,
then you shall attain to indifference as to what has been heard
and what is yet to be heard.
When the intellect crosses over the morass of delusion,
when it sloughs off its delusions, the stanza here assures
Arjuna, that it will develop a disgust, "FOR ALL THAT IS
ACTUALLY HEARD AND THAT IS YET TO BE
HEARD." Here the term "WHAT IS YET TO BE HEARD"
must be understood as a representative term standing for
all "sense experiences that are yet to be experienced."
Naturally so; when the intellect becomes purer then it
loses all its erstwhile charm for sense experiences --- what
it had before, and what it may gain in the future.
Essentially Godly and Divine, Spiritual Consciousness
seems to fall under a self-delusion, which, when analysed,
becomes perfectly evident as to its effects. This cause of
delusion is conceived of as the indescribable power called
Maya. Like unmanifested electricity, Maya, as such, is not
perceptible except in its different manifestations. It is a
phenomenon that can be fully estimated and accounted
for through its varied expressions.
Observing and analysing the effects of Maya within the
constitution of all individualised and embodied souls, the
Vedantic masters have beautifully concluded that it comes
to play in two distinct modes of expression, at two
different layers of the human personality. Thus, at the
intellectual level it expresses itself as a film of doubt and
142
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
hesitation in its understanding, or experiencing, of the Self
in us. This expression Maya is termed by the Masters as
the "Veiling-Power" (Avarana-Shakti).
Due to this mist of ignorance, that envelops the intellect,
when it is unconscious of the Spiritual Reality behind it,
the mind starts projecting forth the world of the not-Self
and superimposes upon it two firm ideas that: (a) "it is
true" (Satyattwa), and (b) that "I am nothing other than the
projected world" (Atmabuddhi). This is Maya's expression
as "Projecting-Power" (Vikshepa-Shakti).
In this stanza it is said that, once the intellect in us is
purified through the art of steady-work, called 'Devotion
through Work,' it becomes possible for it to peep over the
veil of ignorance that separates it from the splendour of
the Spiritual Entity. When the intellect sloughs off its
delusions, it goes beyond its attachment for the charms of
the sensuous world. But before this happens, the intellect,
ignorant of its spiritual destiny, pants to fulfil itself and
surges forward seeking satisfaction amongst the finite
sense-objects of the world.
But, when the intellect discovers in itself a capacity to
pierce through the dreary veil of ignorance, it comes to
live its own Real Nature of Bliss Infinite. Each fleeting joy
in the sense-world only sharpens its appetite for the
Infinite Bliss which is Its Real Nature. To the extent the
clouds have moved and the sun has emerged, to that
extent he who is warming himself at the fireside moves
143
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
away from the fire-place and walks into the open, to bask
in the all-enveloping warmth of the blazing sun. Similarly,
to the extent the illusion of ignorance melts away in an
integrated intellect, to that extent its wanderings in the
sensuous-world are curtailed.
The sense-world is beautifully indicated by two
representative terms "what has been heard (Shrutam)," and
"what is yet to be heard (Shrotavyam)." We must include in
them 'the seen and the unseen,' 'the smelt and the
unsmelt,' 'the tasted and the not-tasted,' and 'the touched
and not-yet-touched.' The intellect of such a purified
Karma-Yogin does not relive its memory of the sensuous
joys it had experienced in the past and also does not
remember that it has to experience still more joys in the
future through the sense-organs, in the world of sense-
objects.
If we take the word meaning of these terms literally we
get the usual interpretation of the commentators: "When
the seeker's mind is not tossed about by the seemingly
different and often opposing conclusions of philosophers,
when they do not upset him any more, then he is
established in inward purity."
SHANKARA CONNECTS THIS STANZA WITH THE
FOLLOWING: "YOU MAY NOW ASK, 'WHEN SHALL I
ATTAIN TRUE CONVICTION OF THE SELF, AFTER
CROSSING BEYOND THE VEIL OF IGNORANCE, AND
144
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
OBTAIN WISDOM THROUGH THE DISCRIMINATION
OF THE SELF AND THE NOT-SELF? ' LISTEN:"
53. When your intellect, though perplexed by what you have
heard, shall stand immovable and steady in the Self, then you
shall attain Self-realisation.
When one's intellect comes to a steady equipoise,
UNDISTURBED by any of the experiences that reach one
through the five great arch-ways of knowledge, then one
is considered as having attained Yoga.
The mind gets agitated mainly due to the flooding-in of
the ever-new rush of stimuli from the outer world. Sense-
organs are the antennae through which the world's
tickling signals creep in and disturb the mental-pool. One
is considered as having attained Yoga only when one, even
in the midst of enjoying sensuous pleasures, and even
while the sense-organs are letting in a flood of stimuli,
does not get at all disturbed in one's inner serenity and
equipoise This idea is better developed and exhaustively
dealt with later in the chapter, where Krishna enumerates
the visible qualities and the perceptible signs of one
established in Wisdom (Sthita-Prajna).
The discussion so far, makes Arjuna so interested that he
is now no more under the influence of his hysteria. He has
come to forget his dejection and sorrow, and is now taking
an active interest in Krishna's exposition. He could not
145
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
control himself from expressing his sincere enquiry as to
what exactly is the nature of such a perfected one who is
beyond the storms of sensuousness. The question
evidently shows that though Arjuna's intellect had
somehow come to appreciate Krishna's theory, something
in him was not quite ready to accept it fully.
LINKING UP THIS STANZA WITH THE NEXT,
SHANKARA SAYS: "ANXIOUS TO KNOW THE
CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF ONE WHOSE
INTELLECT HAS COME TO AN EQUIPOISE, HE ASKS
THIS QUESTION, AS SOON AS HE GETS A CHANCE
TO INTERROGATE":
Arjuna said: 54. What, O Keshava, is the description of him who
has steady Wisdom and who is merged in the Superconscious
state? How does one of steady Wisdom speak, how does he sit,
how does he walk?
In the last two stanzas the discussion naturally turned
towards the Ultimate Goal which a Karma Yogin reaches
when he has, with evenness-of-mind, perfected the
"technique of work."
The idea seems to be quite appealing and the theory,
indeed, logical. There is a ring of conviction in it, when the
theory comes from the mouth of Lord Krishna. Arjuna has
such a mental constitution that Karma Yoga appeals to him
the most.
146
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The grief-sticken hero of the first chapter has forgotten his
hysteria and has now come to take an active interest in the
discussion. As a practical man, he is afraid as to whether,
after gaining this great Goal of Life through Buddhi yoga,
he will be able to live so vigorously in the world outside.
Looking from the Vedic usage of the term, one is apt to
misunderstand that the perfected Yogin, who has come to
rediscover the Self, lives exclusively in a world of his own.
The description of the Upanishads can give a novitiate the
notion that a Perfected Sage is ill-fitted to live in the
world. Arjuna, as a child of the age of hatred and
diplomacy, was curious to know fully the condition of the
Perfected Master before he actually accepted the theory
and tried to live it.
His anxiety to know the entire Truth is clearly shown here
in his very questions upon such non-essentials as, 'How
does he speak,' 'how will he sit,' 'how will he walk,' etc.
These questions must be considered quite appropriate and
dramatic, when they come from one who had been, till
then, a patient of hysteria. Again, the first-half of the
stanza demands a description of a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom
while in Samadhi, that is, with regard to his inner life, and
the second half is asking for a description of how such a
Master will act in the world outside.
Arjuna is asking a forked question: (a) a description of the
state of mind in a man-of-realisation merged in Self-
experience and, (b) an explanation as to how that
147
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
experience will influence his actions in the outer world,
when he emerges from that Transcendental experience.
In this stanza and the following section, "Man-of-Steady-
Wisdom" (Sthita-Prajna), means one who has, through
direct realisation, come to experience and live his Godly
Self.
THE LORD NOW POINTS OUT THOSE
CHARACTERISTIC ATTITUDES IN A REALISED
SAINT, WHICH, SINCE ATTAINABLE BY ALL
THROUGH RIGHT EFFORT, CONSTITUTE THE MEANS
AS SUCH:
The Blessed Lord said: 55. When a man completely casts off, O
Partha, all the desires of the mind, and is satisfied in the Self by
the Self, then is he said to be one of steady Wisdom.
By narrating thus the inner and outer life of the 'man-of-
Self-realisation,' Geeta helps us to detect for ourselves, the
right type of Masters from the charlatans who, though
wolves, wear a goat-skin and enter the fold of the faithful.
Apart from this, these passages have a direct appeal to all
sincere Sadhakas inasmuch as this section gives them an
easy thumb-rule as to what types of values and mental
attitudes they should develop, during their practice, in
order to realise the ever-effulgent Divinity in them --- the
Pure Awareness.
148
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This very opening stanza in this section, is a brilliant
summary of all that we should know of the mental
condition of the Perfect. The words used in this stanza can
be understood fully, only when we remember the
significant fragrance of these words as they stand dancing
among the hosts of other blossoms in the Garden of the
Upanishads. He is considered a Man-of-Wisdom who has
completely cast away ALL DESIRES from his mind.
Reading this stanza in conjunction with what Krishna has
so far said, we can truly come to enjoy the Upanishadic
fragrance in these inspired words of Vyasa.
An intellect, contaminated by ignorance becomes the
breeding-ground of desires, and he who has relieved
himself of this 'Ignorance' through 'Right-Knowledge'
gained in Perception, naturally, becomes 'desireless.' By
explaining here the absence of the EFFECT, the Lord is
negating the existence of the CAUSE: where desires are
not, there "ignorance" has ended, and "Knowledge" has
already come to shine forth.
If this alone were the distinguishing factor of the Man-of-
Steady-Wisdom, then any modern man would condemn
the Hindu Man-of-Wisdom as a rank lunatic; a Hindu
wise-man would then become one who had not even the
initiative to desire. Desire means a capacity of the mind to
see ahead of itself, a scheme or a pasttern, in which he
who desires will probably be more happy. "The wise-man
seems to lose even this capacity, as he goes beyond his
149
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
intellect and experiences the Self," --- this is a criticism that
is generally heard from the materialists.
This stanza cannot thus be condemned since it adds in its
second line that the Perfect-One is "blissful" in his own
experience of the Self. A Perfect man is defined here,
therefore, not only as one who has no desires, but also as
one who has positively come to enjoy the Bliss of the Self!
When one is an infant, one has one's own playmates, and
as one grows from childhood to boyhood, one leaves one's
toys and runs after a new set of things; again, as the boy
grows to youthfulness, he loses his desires for the fancy-
things of his boyhood and craves for yet a newer set of
things; again, in old age, the same entity casts away all
objects that were till then great joys to him and comes to
demand a totally different set of objects. This is an
observed phenomenon. As we grow, our demands also
grow. With reference to the new scheme of things
demanded, the old sets of ideas come to be cast away.
In one's ignorance, when one conceives oneself as the ego,
one has a burning desire for sense-objects, a binding
attachment with emotions, and a jealous preference for
one's pet ideas. But when the ego is transcended, when the
ignorance, like a mist, has lifted itself, and when the finite
ego stands face to face with the Divine Reality in him, it
melts away to become one with the Infinite. In the Self, the
Man-of-Steady-Wisdom, 'SELF-SATISFIED IN THE SELF,'
can no more entertain any desire, or have any appetite, for
150
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
the paltry objects of the body, or of the mind, or of the
intellect. He becomes the very Source of all Bliss.
Such a one is defined here by Vyasa as the 'Man-of-
Steady-Wisdom' (Sthita-Prajna), and as the words come
out from the mouth of Krishna they gather the divine ring
of an incontrovertible Truth.
MOREOVER:
56. He whose mind is not shaken by adversity, and who in
prosperity does not hanker after pleasures, who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a Sage-of-Steady-Wisdom.
In describing the attributes of a Perfect Sage, having
explained that he is one who has come to sacrifice all his
petty desires, in his self-discovered self-satisfaction in the
Self, Krishna explains that, another characteristic by which
we can recognise a sage, is his EQUANIMITY IN
PLEASURE AND PAIN. If, in the last stanza, Krishna
considered the man as an "actor," herein he is considering
him as an "experiencer," A BEARER OF BODY-
AFFLICTIONS.
One who is a stable being, whose heart is undisturbed in
sorrow or in joy, unattached, fearless, and sans-anger, is
described here as a Muni --- a silent sage. Of the emotions
that must be absent in an individual, who is a master in all
situations, we are here pointedly told only of these: (a)
attachment (Raga), (b) fear (Bhaya) and (c) anger (Krodha).
151
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In fact, when we read the biographies of perfected-ones, in
the entire history of man, we find in almost all of them an
antithesis of the ordinary man. The hundred emotions
common to the ordinary man are not at all seen in a
Perfect-one, and therefore, we feel surprised, when the
absence of only these three qualities is asserted so
emphatically here. Naturally a careful student gets
suspicious. Has Vyasa overlooked all other features? Can
this be a complete statement? But on a closer study we
shall discover that, he has not committed "the crime of
inappropriate emphasis upon the non-essentials," as critics
have been tempted to point out.
In the previous stanza we were told that "he is Perfect
who has forsaken all cravings that bubble up in his mind,"
and this stanza asserts the mental stability of such a one.
In the world outside, in our intercourse with the sense-
objects, we can very easily realise that our attachments
with things create in us the pains of the perplexing fear-
phobia. When an individual develops a desire strong
enough to make a deep attachment, instinctively, he starts
entertaining a sense-of-fear for the non-winning of the
object so deeply desired; and, if it has been secured, then
again he fears for the security of the same acquired object.
Similarly, when an object has charmed one to a point of
deep attachment, and when fear itself has started coming
up in waves to disturb the individual, then, such an
individual's attitude towards those that come between
him and the object of his attachment, is called ANGER.
152
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Anger is thus nothing but a feeling that rises in us,
because of our attachment to an object, towards an
obstacle between ourselves and the object of our
attachment; the anger thus arising in a bosom is directly
proportional to the amount of fear one entertains on the
score of the obstacle holding one back from winning one's
object-of-love. Anger, therefore, is only our Raga for an
object, expressed at an obstacle that has come between us
and the object of our desire.
Shankara says that a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom is not
distressed by calamities (a) such as those that may arise
from the disorders of the body (Adhyatmika); (b) those
arising from external objects, such as tigers, etc.
(Adhibhautika); and (c) those arising from unseen causes
such as the cosmic forces causing rains, storms, etc.
(Adhidaivika). Fire increases when fuel is added. But the
'fire of desire' in a Perfect One does not increase when
more pleasures are attained. Such a person is called a
man-of-steady-Knowledge, a silent, serene sage.
MOREOVER:
57. He who is everywhere without attachment, on meeting with
anything good or bad, who neither rejoices nor hates, his
Wisdom is fixed.
An inspired artist, trying to express his idea on the canvas
in the language of colour, will off and on stand back from
his easel, and will again, with growing tenderness and
153
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
love, approach the product of his art, to place a few more
strokes with his brush; here Krishna, inspired by his own
theme, is again and again choosing right words to add
more light and shade to the picture-of-the-Perfect, the one
which he was painting upon the heart-slab of his listener -
-- Arjuna.
He who, without attachment, squarely meets life with all
equanimity and poise, is one who is "established in
Wisdom." Here also we have to understand the entire
stanza as a whole, or else, there will be the danger of
misinterpreting its true meaning. Mere detachment from
the things of life is NOT the sign of perfection, nor of true
discriminative understanding. But many unintelligent
enthusiasts actually desert their duties in life and run
away, hoping that, since they have developed perfect
detachment from the sensuous world, they will gain their
"goal" in the quietude of the jungle. Arjuna himself had
earlier stated that he would renounce the call of duty and
the field of activity. By thus retiring into quietude, the
Pandava-hero hoped to reach Perfection and Peace. To
dissuade Arjuna from taking this calamitous step, Krishna
started his discourse with a serious note in the second
chapter.
Detachment from suicidal affections and unintelligent
tenderness cannot by itself take man to the higher realms
of Divinity. Detachment from the world outside must
equally be accompanied by a growing balance in
ourselves to face all challenges in life --- ' auspicious'
154
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
(Shubha) and 'inauspicious' (Ashubha) --- in perfect
equipoise without either any uncontrolled rejoicing at the
Shubha, or any aversion for the Ashubha experiences.
A mere detachment in itself is not the way of perfect life,
inasmuch as it is only a negative existence of constantly
escaping from life. To live in ATTACHMENT is to live in
slavery to the things of the world. But the Perfect One is
he, who, with divine freedom, lives in the world,
dexterously meeting both joys and sorrows which life may
provide for him. In winter, to be out in the sun and lie
basking in its rays is to enjoy its warmth and at the same
time to suffer its glare. To complain of the glare is to bring
sorrow into the very enjoyment of the warmth. One who
is intelligent will either try to ignore the glare and enjoy
the warmth fully, or shade off the glare and bask in the
enjoyable warmth.
Similarly, life, by its very nature, is a mixture of both good
and bad, and to live ever adjusting ourselves --- avoiding
the bad and striving to linger in the experience of the good
--- is to live unintelligently. The Perfect-One experiences
the best and the worst in life with equal detachment
because he is ever established in THE TRUE AND THE
ETERNAL, which is the very Self.
In his question, Arjuna had enquired of Krishna, how a
Perfect Master would speak. This stanza may be
considered as an answer to it. Since the Perfect man-of-
Wisdom neither feels any aversion to the sorrows nor
155
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
rejoices in the joys of life, he neither compliments
anything in the world, nor does he condemn anything. To
him everything is wonderful. He sees things AS THEY
ARE, uncoloured by his mental moods. Such a Perfect One
is beyond all the known principles of behaviourism of
Western psychology.
MOREOVER:
58. When, like the tortoise which withdraws its limbs from all
sides, he withdraws his senses from the sense-objects then his
Wisdom becomes steady.
After explaining that a Perfect-One is: (a) ever satisfied in
the Self, (b) that he lives in perfect equanimity in pleasure
and pain, and (c) that there is, in him, a complete absence
of attachment to rejoicing or any aversion, it is here
mentioned that a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom has the special
knack of withdrawing his senses from all the disturbing
'fields of objects.' The simile used here is very appropriate.
Just as a tortoise can, even at the most distant suggestions
of danger, instinctively withdraw all its limbs into itself,
and feel safe within, a man-of-Perfection can consciously
withdraw all his antennae that peep out through his five
arches-of-knowledge, called the sense-organs.
In the theory of perception in Vedanta, the mind, bearing
the consciousness, goes out through the sense-organs to
the sense-objects, and, there it takes, as it were, the shape
of the sense-objects, and so comes to gain the "knowledge"
156
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the objects perceived. This idea is figuratively put in the
Upanishad --- the Light of Consciousness, as it were, beams
out through the seven holes in the cranium, each special
'beam' of awareness illuminating only one specific type of
'object.' Thus, the 'Light' that passes through the eyes is
capable of illumining only the FORMS and COLOURS,
while that which emerges through the ears illumines
SOUNDS. In the material world, we can take the example
of the electric-light that expresses through an ordinary
bulb illuminating the objects in the room, while the
electricity, as light, emerging from the X-ray tube
penetrates through the form and illumines things that are
ordinarily not visible to the naked eye.
Thus, in each individual, five distinct beams of the same
Awareness protrude like antennae and give him complete
"knowledge" of the eternal world. These five avenues-of-
knowledge bring to him the innumerable stimuli from the
outer world, which, reaching the mind, provide all the
disturbances that man feels in his life of contacts with the
outer world. If I am blind, the beauty that is passing by
cannot disturb my mind; if I am deaf, I cannot over-hear
criticism against myself, and naturally, it cannot reach me
to agitate my bosom! The untasted or the unsmelt or the
unfelt sense-objects can never bring any pang of sorrow
into the bosom. Here Krishna re-assures Arjuna that a
Man-of-Steady-Wisdom is he, who has the ready capacity
to fold back his senses, from any or all the fields of their
activity.
157
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This capacity in an individual to withdraw his senses at
will from the fields-of-objects is called in Yoga Shastra as
Pratyahara, which the Yogin accomplishes through the
control-of-breath (Pranayama). To a devotee this comes
naturally, because he has eyes and ears only for the form
and stories of his beloved Lord. To a Vedantin, again, this
(Uparati) comes from his well-developed and sharpened
discriminative faculty, with which his intellect makes his
mind understand the futility, of licking the crumbs of joy
and happiness in the wayside ditches of sensuousness,
while he, in his Real Nature, is the Lord of the very store
of Bliss Infinite.
THE SENSES OF A MAN WHO IS ILL, AND
CONSEQUENTLY NOT ABLE TO PARTAKE OF THE
SENSUOUS OBJECTS, ARE SEEMINGLY UNDER
CONTROL, BUT THE TASTE FOR THEM DOES NOT
THEREBY CEASE TO EXIST. HOW DOES EVEN THE
TASTE FOR SENSE-OBJECTS FINALLY END? LISTEN:
59. The objects of the senses turn away from the abstinent man
leaving the longing (behind) ; but his longing also leaves him on
seeing the Supreme.
Without Pratyahara (or Uparati), we can observe cases
wherein an individual comes to maintain sense-
withdrawal from the sense-objects due to some physical
incapacity or due to some special mental mood of
temporary sorrow or misery. In all those cases, though the
sense-organs come to feel an aversion for the respective
158
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
objects, their inclination for these objects merely remains
dormant for the time being. Similarly, Arjuna doubts that,
even in a Yogin, the capacity to withdraw from the
temptations of the sense-world, may be temporary and
that, under favourable or sufficiently tempting
circumstances, they may again raise their hoods to hiss
and to poison. His doubt is answered here.
If you observe the flight of the objects of sensuousness
from the shops to their customers, you can understand
this point very clearly. They always reach only those who
are courting them and are panting to possess them. The
wine-cellars get emptied when the bottle "walkout" to
replenish the side-boards of the drunkards! Ploughs made
by the smithy are not purchased by artists and poets,
doctors and advocates, but they must necessarily reach the
homes of the farmers. Similarly, all sense-objects
ultimately reach those who are courting them with
burning desires. From one who is completely abstinent,
sense-objects must necessarily get repelled.
But even though the sense-objects may, temporarily, seem
to turn away from him who is abstinent, the deep taste for
them, ingrained in his mind, is very difficult to erase
completely. Here Krishna, in his Supreme Wisdom,
assures the seeker that these mental impressions of
sensuous lives, lived in the past by the ego, from the
beginning of creation to date, will all be totally erased, or
at least made ineffective --- as roasted seeds --- when the
159
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
seeker transcends the ego and comes to experience the
Self.
This is not very difficult to understand, since we know
that the objects of sorrow and occasions of tragedy in one
plane-of-consciousness are not available in another. The
kingship that I enjoy in my dream, does not add even a jot
to my dignity when I wake up to realise my insignificant
existence; so too, my meagre existence in the waking-state
will not debar me from the full kingly glory in my dream-
kingdom!!
Similarly, the ego, existing now through the waking,
dream and deep-sleep states, has gathered to itself a dung-
heap of impressions, all purely sensuous. But these cannot
be effective when the same ego, transcending these three
planes, comes to experience the plane of God-
consciousness.
HE, WHO WOULD ACQUIRE STEADINESS OF RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE (Prajna) SHOULD FIRST BRING HIS
SENSES UNDER CONTROL. FOR, IF NOT
CONTROLLED, THEY WILL DO HARM. SO, THE LORD
SAYS:
60. The turbulent senses, O son of Kunti, do violently carry
away the mind of a wise-man, though he be striving (to control
them) .
160
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
In his discourse so far, the Lord has emphasized that a
perfect-Master is one who has complete control over his
sense-appetites. In India, a mere philosophical idea, in
itself, is not considered anything more than a poetic
ideology, and it is not accepted as a spiritual thesis unless
it is followed by a complete technique by which the seeker
can come to live it, in his own subjective experience. True
to this traditional Aryan faith, in the Geeta too, the Lord
indicates to Arjuna the practical method, by which he
should struggle hard, in order to reach the eminence of
perfection in all men-of-steady-Wisdom.
The ignorance of the Spiritual Reality functions in any
individual in three distinct aspects: "Unactivity" (Sattwa)
"Activity" (Rajas); and "Inactivity" (Tamas). When the
Sattwa aspect in us is molested by the "veiling of the
intellect" (Avarana) and the "lack of tranquillity" of the
mind (Vikshepa), then we come to the sorrows caused by
their endless roamings through the sense-organs. Unless
these are well-controlled, they will drag the mind to the
field of the sense-objects, and thus create a chaotic
condition within, which is experienced as sorrow.
That this happens even to a highly evolved seeker, is here
accepted by the statement of the Lord. With this assertion,
he is warning the seeker in Arjuna, that he should not on
any score let his "objective-mind" take hold of, and enslave
his "subjective-intellect." This warning is quite appropriate
and timely in the scheme of thought in this chapter.
161
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Invariably, among those who are practising religion, the
common cause by which very many true seekers fall away
from the Path, is the same all over the world. After a few
years of practice, they, no doubt, come to live a certain
inexplicable inward joy, and over-confident, and often
even vainful of their progress, they relax in their Tapas.
Once they come back to the field of the senses, "the
turbulent senses do violently snatch the mind away" from
the poise of perfect meditation!
61. Having restrained them all, he should sit steadfast, intent on
Me; his Wisdom is steady, whose senses are under control.
Since the sense-organs are thus the saboteurs in the
Kingdom of the Spirit that bring the disastrous downfall
of the Empire of the Soul, Arjuna is warned here that, as a
seeker of Self-perfection, he should constantly struggle to
control his sense-organs and their mad lustful wanderings
in their respective fields. Modern psychology would
certainly look down with a squint-eye upon this Geeta
theory, because, according to Freud and others,
sensuousness is instinctive in man, and to curb it would
lead to an unnatural suppression.
According to the West, TO CONTROL is TO SUPPRESS,
and no science of mental life can accept that suppression is
psychologically healthy. But the Vedic theory is not
pointing to any mental suppression at all. It is only
advising an inward blossoming, an inner growth and
162
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
development, by which one's earlier fields of enjoyments
through the senses, drop out to make room for the
perception of a newer field of ampler joys and more
satisfying Bliss.
This idea is very well brought out here, when Lord
Krishna, as though in the very same breath, repeats both
the negative and the positive aspects of the technique of
Self-development. He advises not only a withdrawal from
the unhealthy gutters of sensuousness, but he also gives
the healthy method of doing so by explaining the positive
technique of Self-perfection. Through a constant attempt
at focussing our attention "ON ME, THE SUPREME," he
advises the disciples to be steady.
In this simple-looking statement of half-a-verse, the Geeta
explains the entire technique of Self-development.
Immoral impulses and unethical instincts, that bring a
man down to the level of a mere brute, are the result of
endless lives spent among sensuous objects, during the
infinite number of different manifestations, through which
the embodied soul, the ego in each one of us, had
previously passed. It is humanly impossible for an
individual to erase and transcend in his life-time, the thick
coating of mental impressions gathered along his journey
from life to life, from embodiment to embodiment.
Naturally, this is the despair of all the promoters of ethics,
the teachers of morality and the masters of spirituality.
163
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The Rishis of old, in their lived experience, discovered for
themselves a technique, by which, all these mental
tendencies could be eradicated. To expose the mind to the
quiet atmosphere of meditation upon the All-perfect
Being, is to heal its ulcers. By this process, one who has
come to gain a complete mastery over his sense-organs, is
considered as one who is 'steadfast-in-Wisdom.'
The concealed suggestion in the stanza now becomes quite
obvious; no one, who, with excessive force controls his
Indriyas, by sheer strength of will and sense of abstinence,
has any chance of flowering into a full-blown spiritual
beauty. He who has all his sense-organs, of their own
accord, lying tamely surrendered at his feet, who has
come to re-discover the Infinite Perfection in himself, is
called a man-of-Perfection. Neither has he ruined his
instruments-of-cognition, nor has he closed down the
arches-of-knowledge in him. A Perfect One is he whose
sway over the animal in him is so complete that the inner
Satan has become, for the Sage in him, a tame Caliban to
run errands and serve faithfully.
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO POINT OUT THE
SOURCE OF ALL EVIL IN THE CASE OF THE
UNSUCCESSFUL:
62. When a man thinks of objects, "attachment" for them arises;
from attachment "desire" is born; from desire arises "anger" . . .
164
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
63. From anger comes "delusion" ; from delusion "loss of
memory" ; from loss of memory the "destruction of
discrimination" ; from destruction of discrimination, he
"perishes. "
From this verse onwards, Lord Krishna explains in five
noble stanzas, the Hindu psychological theory of the fall
of man from Godhood. This is only to bring home to
Arjuna that he, the mighty-armed, must try to conquer all
his Indriyas from all sides. Such a man, concludes Krishna,
is a-man-of-Perfection as conceived in and contemplated
upon, as explained in and glorified by the scriptural books
of the Hindus.
This section also gives us a clear pasttern of the
autobiography of all seekers who have, after long periods
of practice, come to wreck themselves upon the rocks of
failure and disappointment. To a true seeker in Vedanta,
no fall is ever possible. Instances of unsuccessful seekers
are not few, and in all of them the mistake that we notice
is that they ultimately fell back to be victims of sense-
entanglement; and in all those cases we also notice that the
fallen one drank the very dregs of it; there is no half-way
house for such victims --- a slip for them means total
destruction!!
The ladder-of-fall is very beautifully described here. The
path of destruction for a seeker is so elaborately detailed
in these stanzas that, fallen as we are, we shall know how
to get back to our pristine glory and inward perfection.
165
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Like a tree emerges from a seed, the source of all evil
starts from our own wrong thinking, or false
imaginations. Thought is creative; it can make us, or mar
us. If rightly harnessed, it can be used for constructive
purposes; if misused, it can totally destroy us. When we
constantly think upon a sense-object, the CONSISTENCY
OF THOUGHT creates in us an ATTACHMENT for the
object of our thought; and, when more and more thoughts
flow towards an object of attachment, they crystallize to
form a BURNING DESIRE for the possession and
enjoyment of the object-of-attachment. The same force of
the motion, when directed towards obstacles that threaten
the non-fulfilment of our desires, is called anger (Krodha).
An intellect fumed with anger (Krodha) comes to
experience DELUSION and, the deluded intellect has no
power of discrimination, because it loses all MEMORIES-
OF-THE-PAST. Any one filled with anger is capable of
doing acts totally forgetting himself and his relationship
with all others. Sri Shankaracharya says in this connection
that a deluded fool, in this mental condition, might even
fight with his own teachers or parents, forgetting his
indebtedness to these revered persons.
Thus, when an individual, through wrong channels of
thinking, becomes ATTACHED to an object, the
attachment matures into a burning DESIRE to posses that
object. Then, when an obstruction to possess that object-
of-desire shoots him up into a fit of ANGER, the mental
disturbance caused by the emotion DELUDES the intellect
166
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
and makes the individual FORGET his sense of proportion
and his sense of relationship with things and beings
around him. When thus, a deluded intellect forgets its
dignity of culture, it loses its discriminative capacity,
which is called, in common parlance, as 'conscience'
(Buddhi). Conscience is that knowledge enjoyed for
differentiating the good from the evil, which often forms a
standard in ourselves, and, whenever it can, warns the
mind against its lustful sensuousness and animalism.
Once this 'conscience' is dulled, the man becomes a two-
legged-animal with no sense of proportion, and with no
ears for any subtler call in him, than the howling urgent
hungers of the flesh. Thereby, he is guaranteeing for
himself a complete destruction inasmuch as such a bosom
cannot come to perceive, or strive for, the Higher, the
Nobler and the Diviner.
THE CONTEMPLATION OF SENSE-OBJECTS HAS
BEEN DESCRIBED AS THE SOURCE OF ALL EVILS.
NOW THE MEANS OF DELIVERANCE (MOKSHA) IS
DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
64. But the self-controlled man, moving among objects, with his
senses under restraint, and free from both attraction and
repulsion, attains peace.
He alone --- who, with perfect self-control, goes through
life among the infinite number of sense-objects, each
impinging upon him and trying to bind him with its
charm, and approaches them with neither love nor hatred
167
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
--- comes to enjoy PEACE. By running away from the
sense-objects, nobody can assure for himself any inner
peace; because, the inner disturbance depends not upon
the presence or the absence of the sense-objects in the
outer-world, but essentially upon the mind's agitations for
procuring the desirable objects, or for getting rid of the
undesirable objects.
But a Master-of-Wisdom, with perfect self-control, moves
among the objects of the world with neither any special
love, nor any particular aversion, for them. Wherever I go,
my shadow must play all around me according to the
position of the light; but the shadow can neither entangle
me with love, nor can destroy me with hatred! The outer-
world-of-objects is able to whip that man who lends the
power to the objects to smother him!!
Supposing there is a lunatic who is whipping himself and
weeping in pain; his sorrows can be ended only when he
is persuaded not to take the whip in his hand. He could be
advised, even if he kept the whip in his hand, not to swing
his arms in the fashion in which he is doing! Similarly,
here, the mind woos the objects and gets beaten. It is told,
as an advice, that an individual who lives in self-control,
will no longer lend his own life's dynamism to an object to
persecute him --- through his own sentimental aversion to,
or love for, that object.
When the lunatic is taught not to wield the whip and
strike himself, he is immediately saved from the sorrows
168
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
of the whip. Similarly, when a mind is trained in these two
aspects: (a) to live in self-control, and (b) to move among
the sense-objects, with neither an attachment for, nor an
aversion to them, the disturbances and agitations in the
mind caused by the sense-enchantments are all
immediately brought under control. This condition of the
mind is called tranquillity or peace (Prasada).
This is symbolically represented in the sweet-distribution
after every Puja in all religions, and is called among the
Hindus as Prasada (or Bhog), meaning that, one who has,
during the ritual, practised perfect self-control and God-
contemplation, comes to enjoy, as a result of his action, a
tranquillity in the mind which is termed as Spiritual
Grace, or Divine Peace (Ishwara Prasada).
Here, as far as a Vedantin is concerned, Prasada is mental
purification. That mind is considered as pure, which feels
in itself the least sense-disturbances. One who has learnt
to live in self-control and has trained himself to live
among the sense-objects in a spirit of the least attachment
to, or aversion for them, has the least disturbance, because
of the ineffectiveness of the sense-objects upon him.
Thereby, his mind automatically becomes more and more
calm and tranquil, and is considered as pure (Prasada) for
purposes of the spiritual life.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN PEACE IS ATTAINED?
LISTEN:
169
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
65. In that peace all pains are destroyed; for, the intellect of the
tranquil-minded soon becomes steady.
It is natural for an Arjuna-mentality of uncompromising
intellectualism to ask Krishna: "Then what?" And as an
answer, the Lord explains why he should develop and
maintain tranquillity of the mind in himself. "IN
TRANQUILLITY ALL SORROWS ARE DESTROYED."
This sentence is obviously commented upon as a
definition of happiness. A peaceful mind is significant of
happiness. PEACE IS HAPPINESS; HAPPINESS IS
PEACE. The least-agitated mind is proof against all
sorrows inasmuch as sorrow is nothing but a state of
agitation in the mind.
This explanation does not satisfy us completely since
Krishna's assertion is that 'sorrows will be destroyed'
(hanih). In order to bring out clearly the meaning implied
in the phrase 'destruction of sorrows,' we will have to
understand it as the "elimination of vasanas." Earlier, in the
introduction, we have said that the vasana granulations,
giving a thick coating to the subjective mind, are the cause
for its delusion which creates all sorrows for the imperfect;
while the Perfect transcends the vasanas through the
Buddhi yoga explained earlier.
It is very well-known that all the vasanas existing in an
individual who is facing life constantly, cannot be fully
eradicated by him. The secret of doing so has been
explained here by the Lord. Keeping the mind exposed to
170
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
an atmosphere of tranquillity (Prasada), consciously
brought about through an intelligent life of self-control, is
the secret whereby all the vasanas can get eliminated.
THIS TRANQUILLITY IS EXTOLLED HERE BY LORD
KRISHNA:
66. There is no knowledge (of the Self) to the unsteady; and to
the unsteady no meditation; and to the unmeditative no peace; to
the peaceless, how can there be happiness?
Here is an explanation why quietude of the mind is so
often and so insistently emphasised in the literature
explaining the Hindu-technique of Self-perfection. Unless
the mind be quiet, the individual will not have the
intellectual leisure for cultural self-development, nor the
inner energy for consistently living spiritual perfections,
that a truly developed man yearns for. Unless there is
tranquillity, there cannot be steadiness of intellectual
application to the problems of life, and without this self-
evaluation of life and true observation with a clear
discriminative analysis, we cannot have in us the required
amount of "Devotion to Self-knowledge" (Bhavana).
Without such a glorious Goal before us, constantly
beckoning us unto itself, like a pole star, our life shall be a
lost ship in an ocean, going nowhere, reaching nowhere,
and ultimately foundering upon some treacherous rock.
One who has no philosophical goal in life to strive and
yearn for, will not know what peace of mind is, and to one
171
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
who is thus restless, "where is happiness?" To live in
balance, and sail safely upon the uncertain waves of the
ocean of life, through both its smiling weather and stormy
days, we must have a constant perception of the Real.
Without a drummer, the dancers' foot-work cannot be
rhythmic and cannot keep perfect time.
WHY IS THERE NO KNOWLEDGE FOR THE
UNSTEADY? LISTEN:
67. For, the mind, which follows in the wake of the wandering
senses, carries away his discrimination, as the wind carries
away a boat on the waters.
As a ship with sails up and helmsman dead would be
completely at the mercy of the fitful storms and reckless
waves, and will not reach any definite harbour, but is
destroyed by the very tossings of the waves, so too, life
gets capsized and the individual drowned, if his mind is
unanchored and left to be carried hither and thither by the
uncertain buffets of passionate sense-storms. Therefore,
the senses are to be controlled if man is to live a better and
more purposeful life, designed and planned for enduring
success.
HAVING EXPLAINED THE PROPOSITION
ENUNCIATED EARLIER, THE LORD CONCLUDES BY
RE-AFFIRMING HIS STATEMENT:
172
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
68. Therefore, O Mighty-armed, his knowledge is steady whose
senses are completely restrained from sense-objects.
It is natural, in conversation, that we do not directly give
our wise conclusions upon "the do's and dont's" of life,
without giving the logic of our thoughts leading to our
conclusions. Without preparing our friend's mind to
perceive the logic of these conclusions, we dare not
declare to him any truth, however divinely acceptable the
declarations are. Arjuna has been told earlier all the
necessary arguments, and here in the stanza, Krishna re-
asserts the same proposition: "Life in self-control alone is
life worth living, if we demand from it anything more
than tears, sobs, sighs and groans."
He alone is a man of Wisdom, rooted in joy and bliss, who
has completely restrained all his senses from their wild
roamings among their sense-objects.
"BY DESTROYING THE SENSE ORGANS ROAMING IN
THE SENSE-OBJECTS," it does not mean that a man of
Self-development should destroy his capacities for
perception of the world outside; nor does it mean that he
is one who has been rendered incapable of enjoying life.
Sense-debility is no sign of better-knowledge. It is only
meant here that the sense-objects filtering through the five
archways of knowledge will not, in a Perfect man, flood
his mind to bring chaos and destruction of his established
inner peace and tranquillity.
173
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
The ordinary individual, in his ego-centric existence,
becomes victimized by the sense-organs, while he who
has conquered the ego and has transcended his matter-
identifications, comes to live in freedom and perfect
control over the tyrannical sense organs.
IN ORDER TO MAKE IT CLEAR, THE LORD
PROCEEDS:
69. That which is night to all beings, in that the self-controlled
man keeps awake; where all beings are awake, that is the night
for the Sage (MUNI) who sees.
In order to bring home to Arjuna the idea that the world,
as experienced by an individual through the goggles of
the mind-intellect-body, is different from what is
perceived through the open windows of spirituality, this
stanza is given. The metaphorical language of this verse is
so complete in detail that the data-mongering modern
intellect is not capable of entering into its poetic beauty.
Of all the peoples of the world, the Aryans alone are
capable of bringing about a combination of poetry and
science, and when the poet-philosopher Vyasa takes up
his pen, to pour out his art on to the ancient palmyra-
leaves to express the Bliss of Perfection, in the ecstasy, he
could not have used a better medium in the Geeta, than
his poetry.
Here, two points-of-view --- of the ignorant and of the
wise --- are contrasted. The ignorant person never
174
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
perceives the world as it is; he always throws his own
mental colour on to the objects and understands the
imperfections in his mind to be a part and parcel of the
objects perceived. The world, viewed through a coloured
glass-pane, must look coloured. When this colouring
medium is removed, the world appears AS IT IS.
The Consciousness in us is today capable of recognizing
the world only through the media of the body, mind, and
intellect. Naturally, we see the world imperfect, not
because the world is so, but because of the ugliness of the
media through which we perceive it.
A Master-mind is he who, rooted in his Wisdom, opens up
the windows-of-his-perception and looks at the world
through the eye-of-Wisdom.
When an electrical engineer comes to a city, and when at
dusk, the whole city smiles forth with its lights, he
immediately enquires: "Is it A. C. or D. C. current?"; while
the same vision, to an illiterate villager, is a wondrous
sight and he only exclaims: "I have seen lights that need
no wick or oil!" From the stand-point of the villager, there
is no electricity and no problem of A. C. or D. C. currents.
The world the engineer sees among the very same lamps,
is not realised or known by the unperceiving intellect of
the villager. Nor is the engineer awake to the world of
strange wonderment which the villager enjoys.
175
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
Here, we are told that the ego-centric, finite, mortal is
asleep to the World-of-Perception enjoyed and lived by
the Man-of-Steady-Wisdom; and that the Perfect One
cannot see and feel the thrills and sobs which the ego
experiences in its selfish life of finite-experience.
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO TEACH BY AN
ILLUSTRATION THAT A WISE DEVOTEE ALONE,
WHO HAS ABANDONED DESIRES AND WHOSE
WISDOM IS STEADY, CAN ATTAIN MOKSHA, AND
NOT HE WHO, WITHOUT RENOUNCING, CHERISHES
DESIRES:
70. He attains Peace into whom all desires enter as waters enter
the ocean, which, filled from all sides, remains unmoved; but not
the "desirer of desires. "
It is very well-known that although millions of gallons of
water reach the ocean through the various rivers, yet the
level of water in the ocean does not change even by a
fraction. Similarly, even though the infinite number of
sense-objects may pour in their stimuli, and reach the
mental zone of the Perfect Man through his five sense-
channels, they do not create any commotion or flux, in his
bosom.
Such an individual, who always finds his own level in
spite of the fact that he is living amidst the sense-objects,
and with his sense-organs unavoidably ever in contact
with the objects, is called a Man-of-Perfection, a true Saint.
176
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
And Krishna asserts that such an individual alone can
truly discover peace and happiness in himself. The Lord,
in the Geeta, not satisfied with this negative assertion,
positively denies any true peace or joy to those who are
"desirers of desires."
This idea is totally in opposition with the modern belief in
the material world. The materialists believe that by
fanning up their desires, and satisfying as many of them
as possible, one is helped to live a life of joy and
happiness. Modern civilisation, based upon
industrialisation and large-scale production, is attempting
to whip up desires, and this attempt has now succeeded to
such an extent that the average man has a million times
more desires today than his fore-father ever entertained, a
century ago. The financiers and the industrialists, with the
aid of modern scientific knowledge, struggle hard to
discover and to satisfy new desires, and to the extent an
individual has come to fulfil his newly-created desires, he
is taught by the day's civilisation that he is more happy
than ever before.
On the other hand, the great thinkers of the past in India,
perhaps through their experience, or through their more
careful and exhaustive thinking, discovered that the joy
created through satisfaction of desires can never be
complete. They discovered that joy or happiness, at any
given time, is a quotient when the "number of desires
fulfilled" is divided by the "total number of desires
entertained" by the same individual at that time. This
177
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
mathematical truth has been accepted by the modern
preachers of secularism also; but in their practical
application, the old Rishis and the modern politicians
seem to differ to a large extent.
In the modern world, the attempt is to increase the
numerator, which is represented by the "number of the
desires fulfilled." The Scriptural Masters of India also were
living in a world peopled by a society of men, and their
philosophical contemplations were upon man as a social
being, and their aim too was to bring more happiness in
their society. Unlike the present prophets of profit, these
Rishis of Religion did not conceive that an attempt to
increase the NUMERATOR without a corresponding
attention upon the rate of increase of the
DENOMINATOR, could produce any palpable increase in
joy. On the other hand, today, we are struggling hard to
increase the "number of desires fulfilled" without at the
same time, trying to control the "number of desires
entertained." That this state of affairs cannot produce any
palpable increase in the QUOTIENT OF HAPPINESS is
the scriptural verdict which seems to be an easily
understandable scientific truth.
Herein, the Geeta is only repeating what the Upanishadic
Rishis never get tired of emphasising in the Scriptures of
India. The "desirer of desires" can never come to perfect
peace (Shanti). Only he who has, in his spirit of
detachment, gained a complete control over his mind, so
that the sense-objects of the outer world cannot create in
178
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
him an infinite number of yearnings or desires, is the
Man-of-Peace-and-Joy. The objects in the outer world
cannot themselves tease a man by their existence, or by
their non-existence. The outer world can borrow its
capacity to ill-treat man only when he exposes himself
unguarded, and gets wounded and crushed by his own
attachments to a wrong valuation of the sense-objects.
In this stanza Bhagawan is only giving a more elaborate
and complete commentary upon the opening line of this
section where He started the description of a Man-of-
Steady-Wisdom. There He explained that, "When a man
completely casts off all the desires in his mind, then he is
said to be one of Steady-Knowledge."
BECAUSE IT IS SO, THEREFORE:
71. That man attains peace who, abandoning all desires, moves
about without longing, without the sense of 'l-ness' and 'my-
ness. '
There are commentators who believe that this and the
following stanza explain the Path of Renunciation, which
is, in fact, not altogether ignored in the text of the Geeta.
Since, as we said earlier, the second chapter is almost a
summary of the entire Divine Song, it has to indicate even
this Samnyasa Yoga, which will be later on explained at
length and hinted at different places during the entire
length of the Geeta.
179
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This stanza seems to ring clearly the significant advice
given earlier by Krishna, almost at the very opening of his
philosophical discussions, in this chapter. He had advised
therein: "HAVING CONQUERED THE MENTAL
AGITATIONS CREATED BY THE PAIRS-OF-
OPPOSITES, FIGHT THE BATTLE OF LIFE." The same
idea seems to be resounding here at the close of the
chapter.
The first line of the stanza explains the mental condition of
one who comes to discover Real Peace in himself. Such an
individual, it says, renounces all desires and has no
attachments or longings. The second line describes the
condition of such an individual's intellect and it asserts
that it is without any sense of 'I-ness' or 'my-ness.' The ego
is the cause for the sense-attachments and longings.
Where the ego is not perceptible, as in sleep, there are no
longings or desires in the individual or, at least, they are
dormant. Thus, if the first line of the stanza is describing a
negation of the effects of "ignorance," the second line
asserts the absence of the very cause from which desires
and the agitations arise.
Earlier, in the introduction, we explained that the split in
the personality of Arjuna was caused by the intervention
of the sense of his ego and his egoistic-desires, which
broke up the subjective and objective aspects of his mind
into two independent islands with a vast ocean of surging
waves of desires between them. With a soft suggestion,
after explaining all the logic of thought, Krishna is
180
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
carefully placing his finger on the very ulcer in the
Pandava's mind.
The stanza, in its sum-total suggestions, advises us that all
our sufferings in the world are caused by our own ego-
centric misconception and the consequent arrogance
characterised by our ever-multiplying demands for wealth
and our endless desires.
Samnyasa means sacrifice, and to live in a spirit of sacrifice
after renouncing completely one's ego and its desires is
true Samnyasa, wherein an individual comes to live in
constant awareness of his fuller and ampler Divinity. The
general misunderstanding that to run away from life is
Samnyasa, or to colour the cloth is to become a true monk,
has cast an irreparable slur on the philosophy of the
Upanishads. Hinduism considers him alone to be a
Samnyasin "who has learnt the art of living his life in
constant inspiration, which is gained through an
intelligent renunciation of his ego-centric misconceptions."
Shankara beautifully explains this point of view in his
commentary on the stanza. "THAT MAN OF
RENUNCIATION, WHO, ENTIRELY ABANDONING
ALL DESIRES, GOES THROUGH LIFE CONTENTED
WITH THE BARE NECESSITIES OF LIFE, WHO
REGARDS NOT AS HIS, EVEN THOSE THINGS WHICH
ARE NEEDED FOR MERE BODILY EXISTENCE, WHO IS
NOT VAIN OF HIS KNOWLEDGE, --- SUCH A MAN-
OF-STEADY-KNOWLEDGE, WHO KNOWS BRAHMAN,
181
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ATTAINS PEACE (NIRVANA), THE END OF ALL THE
MISERY OF MUNDANE EXISTENCE (SAMSARA). IN
SHORT, HE BECOMES BRAHMAN.
THIS DEVOTION TO KNOWLEDGE IS EXTOLLED AS
FOLLOWS:
72. This is the BRAHMIC -state, O Son of Pritha. Attaining
this, none is deluded. Being established therein, even at the end
of life, one attains to oneness with BRAHMAN.
To renounce all desires is to destroy completely the last
vestures of one's ego. Renunciation of ego is not a state of
dull, meaningless emptiness. Where the delusory ego has
ended, the State of Full-Knowledge, or Selfhood, has
dawned. To realise the Self in one's own bosom is to
realise at once the Self which is All-pervading and Eternal
(Brahman).
When the ego has ended, the Consciousness is not known
to be anything other than the Eternal, and as such the
Knower of Truth, in a brilliant experience of the Self,
becomes the Self, and therefore, this state is called Self-
hood (Brahmi-sthitih).
A doubt may still arise that even after this realisation, we
may again fall into the delusion of the ego and come to
suffer the ego's world of imperfections and sorrows. To
deny this tragedy, we have been told how, having realised
the Self once, no more can the individual fall back into his
182
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
ancient delusions. This experience of the Self need not
necessarily take place in the very youthful days of one's
life. Even in old age --- nay, even in the last moment of
this embodiment --- if a seeker can come to experience,
even for a moment, this egoless State of Tranquillity and
Poise, even a passing glimpse of the Selfhood, it is
sufficient to gain this Brahmic-State pointed out in
Vedantic literature.
"Negation of the false and assertion of the True" is the
Path that has been indicated in the Upanishads. The very
same path, in its practical application, is designated here
in the Geeta, in Vyasa's original contribution, as Karma
Yoga. To work without attachment and desires, egoism
and vanity, ever in perfect equilibrium in both success and
failure, is to deny the ego its entire field of activity, and
unconsciously to assert the greater Truth, the Self. Thus, in
technique, the Geeta's Karma Yoga is not at all different
from the Vedantic Technique of Meditation. But Arjuna got
confused and perplexed because he took Krishna's words
too literally, and therefore, in the following chapter, he
expresses his mental confusion in the opening lines. The
Lord, therefore, explains Karma Yoga exhaustively in the
next chapter.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the second discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE
183
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda
This chapter is named as 'Sankhya Yoga' not in the sense
that it is the Sankhyan philosophy here summarised or
borrowed by Krishna. Here the word Sankhya is used only
in its etymological sense as "the sequence of logic in any
line of correct thinking and the logical enumeration of the
arguments based on which a certain intellectual
conclusion has been arrived at." It is in this sense that the
highly philosophical Chapter II of the Geeta is termed as
Sankhya Yoga in its epilogue (Sankalpa Vakya).
It is true that in the original Mahabharata, the Geeta
chapters do not carry this Sankalpa Vakya. Commentators
differ in attributing to any single individual the
authorship of this Sankalpa Vakya. However, it has been
accepted that some scholar, or scholars, analysed the
contents of each chapter and gave an appropriate title to
each. To all students of the Geeta, it is indeed a great help.
Shankara, however, does not comment upon this portion
at all.
Om Om Om Om Om
184
